He scowled at me, or at something just behind my shoulder. “I’m going to
see Iris,” he said.

It was quite definite, he was going to see Iris. It would probably, I
supposed, do Iris all the good in the world to see Napier on this
critical night. Napier and Iris. It might make her care whether she
lived or died ... but why shouldn’t she die? Venice would condemn her to
die. Iris was the foe. Why shouldn’t she die? You can’t do things like
that, and not die. Stealing like a little thief into the garden of
Venice, and stealing away like a little thief ... to bear Napier’s
child, unknown to Napier....

“Hell!” he muttered. I stared at him, at those burning, broken eyes.

“Hell!” he said. “Oh, God, what hell! What? If you only knew....”

“I don’t want to know,” I snapped. Well, did one want to know? But he
didn’t hear, didn’t care, didn’t see. Being with him, you can see, was
exactly like eavesdropping. Why, if Venice came in and saw this
love-lost man ... her Napier, her darling, like this, with burning
broken eyes. But there are some things that can’t happen! You couldn’t
take Napier from Venice. And how quickly, how poignantly, Venice, if she
saw him like this, would know the difference between his easy, smiling
love for her and this ... damnable madness.

But in the dark taxi she wouldn’t see his face, and I was just about to
try again to get him away when he said fiercely: “It’s not as though I
don’t know anything about it. Or do you think Iris is a liar? What?”

“Napier, you really must pull yourself together--”

“No, but any one would think I was a most fearful cad. What?”

And he scowled, in that Napier way of his that made one want to forgive
him everything. “I mean, not coming before, seeing she’s so ill ...
waiting all this time, and coming just now. Why, she wrote to me four
weeks ago, saying she was going to be just slightly ill and have a rest
for a week or two, so of course--Oh, look here, here’s the letter,
you’ll see for yourself--”

“But I don’t want to see for myself. Steady, man! I quite understand. Of
course you couldn’t know....”

“No, but look here, you’ll see....”

Feverishly he began fumbling in his inside-pockets, pulling out papers,
a pocket-book, passports....

Venice could be very still. I imagined her in the doorway, looking at
Napier in this state. She would be very still, and in her stillness she
would be destroyed. Venice was jealous, so jealous and possessive. “Got
to be with Napier,” she had pleaded to me once. “You don’t know what
he’s thinking about half the time, and he doesn’t know what he’s doing
the other half.”

Some of the papers dropped to the floor, and I picked them up and thrust
them into his gaping pocket. The old nun smiled at me over her
spectacles, and then looked at Napier and tapped her forehead. But you
could see she liked the looks of Napier. “_Quelle belle silhouette!_”
she grinned. I don’t believe that Napier to this day knows there was any
one but our two selves in that lodge.

He waved a white thing covered with scrawled pencil-marks, and beside it
I somehow saw that letter from a draughty house on a hill of strangled
olives. But between the two came the vision of Venice destroyed.

“I don’t want to read it, Napier. I quite understand. What on earth
does it matter whether you knew or not, so long as you know now?”

“Thinks a lot of you,” he said darkly. “Told me, last time I saw
her....”

He passed a hand over his mouth. I said: “But....”

“Beastly,” he said, looking at me with enormous, dark surprise. “That’s
what I feel. Beastly. As though my skin was a dirty shirt. Ever get
that? I mean, here she’s dying, and I ... God, how one gets to know
oneself! What? But I’d like you to see. I mean, since it’s you. She
thinks a lot of you, I know she does. Thinks you’re nice. Funny how she
says that, ‘nice.’ What? But what’s she want to lie for? Iris never
lies. Never. That’s what beats me. I mean, why, to me? What? Go on,
you’ll see....”

Crumpled the letter was, but he had, in a sort of way, smoothed it out.
I stared at it. I had to, for he was watching me with those ruined,
pleading eyes. The greyhound unleashed....

“She’s dying.” I heard his voice from miles away. “You can’t tell me!
She’s dying....”

“She won’t die,” I said firmly, glad to look up from the letter. And,
you know, I was quite certain at that moment that she wouldn’t die. The
beloved of the favourite of the gods wouldn’t die. The favourites of the
gods are not let off so easily. Oh, she wouldn’t die! It would be too
easy to die. “The Marches are never let off anything....”

I stared at the crumpled-looking thing in my hand. I didn’t read it. The
poor devil was only showing me the thing because, at that lost moment,
he was starving for understanding, for any one’s understanding, after
these ten months of silence, of Venice-Napier-Iris silence....

I couldn’t, merely from the wretched fact of staring at the thing
blankly, avoid the first few lines of that schoolgirl scrawl. “Napier, I
have to go to a nursing-home for a few weeks’ rest. Napier, dear Napier!
I’ve tried not to write, you know I have, just as we promised, but as we
are never to meet again I’d like you to pray----”

That is all I read, and there I stood, staring at that crumpled letter
like an idiot. “As we are never to meet again....”

Figures moved, I could see them, hear them, their cries, laughter,
silences. Their silences. Napier, Venice, Iris. They had come together,
blindly, desperately. By chance--but it is written in vinegar that there
is no such thing as chance. And I, why, I had been appointed, a silly
finger of fate, to make “chance” more sure! They had come together,
those three, propelled to each other from darkness for darkness’s sake.
The weak to the weak, the strong in chains. Always that is the way of
things, and for no reason at all except life’s most damnable unfairness,
which is for ever saying: the weak shall be made weaker, the strong
shall be destroyed. Venice was strong, strong as gold, in loyalty and
love. Incorruptible, golden Venice! Salute to Venice! So, said the
Prince of Darkness, she must be destroyed, and to destroy her in the
most efficient and painful way Napier must see Iris, unseen since
girlhood, a grown-up Napier must see a grown-up Iris, a youth curiously
sensible to the pitiful must suddenly see an Iris wrapped in tragedy and
scandal, a helpless, hopeless, unhappy woman--the favourite of the gods
and the poor shameless, shameful lady! And it was arranged, the
destruction of Venice, to begin with a sudden, surprised cry of “Iris!”
in the night, and then, behold! two cars would sweep through the silent
streets into the heart of the dark forest of London, even to Napier’s
small toy house in Brompton Square. Oh, how clearly one could see them,
hear them, those friends of long ago. Clear to see they were, fumbling
with their lives in the darkness of all life, most emphatically not
talking of love, most emphatically being old friends. Clear to see,
those two, Napier and Iris, the ancient friends. Maybe, to make chance
more sure and flesh more weak, which is a jesting habit of the fallen
archangel’s, they had been in love long ago and had been unhappy and had
parted. The queer death of Boy Fenwick would have come between a boy and
girl love, and across the wide gulf that separates a young man of
consequence from a lady of pleasure they would not have seen each other
for a long time. “There were two roads leading from a certain tree.” And
one might hear Napier that night, not this love-lost thing, but the
favourite of the gods, happy on the wings of an ancient friendship,
pulling at Iris’s arm to persuade her out of her car: “Iris, come in for
a moment. Oh, come along, Iris! I know how fond you are of a nice glass
of cold water, and I have some of the most superior cold water in
London. What? And we’ll never have another chance to talk again....” And
Iris, Iris of the lament for a child! Iris had lit a flame and was like
to be burnt to death in the cold fires of that flame. Iris had lit a
flame, and the flames that Iris lit seemed quenchable only by death. Boy
and Iris. Hector and Iris. Napier and Iris. But Napier could not die,
favoured of the gods. Iris could not die, “for the Marches are never let
off anything,” and so it would be the younger brother of
Hector-not-so-proud who must die, who must have died, thoughtfully
trying to tempt his mother into the carelessness of death.

The lay-sister had gone into the other room, which must have been a sort
of kitchen, and Napier had taken her chair. He sat there, shadowed with
whiteness, scowling into the black tin box.

“I see,” I said. “Of course....” I made him take the letter back, and
suddenly he looked up at me intently. He’d find out something, he would.

“She is dying, isn’t she? You’re certain yourself, aren’t you? What?”

“The doctor should be in in a moment, and you can ask him. No, I don’t
think she’s dying. My sister had the same sort of thing, and she’s
dancing at the moment--”

“Same sort of--what thing, then? What?”

A _gaffe_, a _faux pas_, a bloomer! He scowled up at me, blackly
intent....

“Ptomaine poisoning,” I said.

“Oh, God!” he said. “Oh, God! What? Poison....”

He stared at the letter which I had put into his hand. He turned it
about, and seemed to think profoundly. “You see,” he muttered, “it’s all
wrong, this. All wrong. What?”

I wasn’t cast for a moralist. What I said, very uncomfortably, was:
“Well....”

“All this messing about,” Napier scowled at the letter. Then he looked
at me, darkly, helplessly.

“Get let in for things,” he said.

“Difficult,” I said. “I know....”

“God, isn’t it! Difficult.... What? I mean, when you want to be ...
well, when you want to live clean. We promised, oh God, yes! not to
write, never to meet.... Must live clean, you see. What? There isn’t,
when you come to think of it, any other way _to_ live....”

“Guy says that....”

“Guy? Yes, but ... need guts like Guy’s, don’t you? What? Look here,” he
suddenly waved the letter at me, “will you go out and keep Venice
company for a moment? I mean, see what she’s doing? And I’ll see the
doctor fellow and make him let me see Iris for a moment. Promise wiped
out by approach of death.... What? I mean, lonely for her here.... Told
me, last time I saw her that she was lonely. Hurts, loneliness. What?
And then I find her in this hole....”

He thrust the letter into his gaping coat-pocket. I could see it there,
that pencilled scrawl. Letters, letters, letters like radium-bombs, left
lying about for years, then bursting. What fools men were, keeping
letters ... travelling about with them, sticking them into their
coat-pockets. Suppose Venice saw that letter ... just a few lines of it.
Whether Iris lived or died ... suppose Venice saw just a few lines of
that letter. For Venice....

“Napier,” I said.

He stared at me, extraordinarily handsome at that moment, and I remember
thinking just then of what is always said, that women are not very
attracted by good-looking men. But what is always said must be wrong.

“I say,” he said, “got a cigarette? What?”

“Napier,” I said, “give me that letter....”

“Or,” I said, “have two matches to your cigarette....”

A tiny smile fluttered round the thin quivering lips. “There’s no end to
it,” he whispered, “is there? Once you begin. The nasty precautions....”

He struck a match, and the flame lit the ruin in his dark, fevered eyes.
“You can’t,” he said, “have anything cleaner than love. You can’t. This
love, anyway. Clean ... clean as the Virgin Mary. And then ... you’re
dogged by dirt. You think fine things, fine sacrifices ... and you’re
dirty as all Sodom and Gomorrah. All this nastiness round a thing, all
this messing about....”

It was as the letter burnt in his hand and fluttered, just like a hurt
crow, to the floor, while he watched it with intent seriousness, that I
heard a step by the door in the other room. To see Conrad Masters alone,
I hurried towards it. There he was, tired, worried-looking, his sharp
features sticking like a great bird’s out of that rough brown coat.

“Bad,” he muttered. “Can’t do more. She’s conscious, too. And doesn’t
give a damn. Not a damn. I told her you were here, and she said ‘Nice’
to that, but didn’t seem to think you were worth living for. Need a
miracle now.... ‘Nice!’”

“But, good God,” I said, “we’ve got a miracle here! He’s a bit mad, but
miracle is his second name....”

“And what’s his first?” Masters snapped.

“Harpenden....”

“First name, Christian name,” said Masters wearily. “Napier, by any
chance?”

“You’re right,” said Masters. A decidedly undecided man? Why, he
radiated resolution: and a lean sort of mirth. “Never know your luck,”
he said. “Not in this world....” I just managed to catch him by the coat
as he plunged towards the other room, in which one could make out the
tail of Napier’s coat. “Masters,” I whispered, “I went and told him it
was ptomaine poisoning....”

“Good,” said Masters. Those gentle worried eyes with the faintly amused
look. “That’s all right,” he smiled. “Young ass.”

There sat Napier, a lost man....

“Come along,” Masters jabbed at him. “Come along, man! Waive
introduction. Life and death....”

Napier jumped up. Masters looked almost fresh and boyish beside him. A
captain of men, that was Conrad Masters.

“I say,” Napier said....

“Look here,” said Masters, “I’m taking you in to cheer her up. Might
make all the difference. Just might....”

Napier tried to smile. Oh, he tried.

“But, doctor,” he said. “Is she ... going?”

“She wants to go, that’s the trouble. Any one would think,” snapped that
captain of men, “that I was committing a felony in trying to keep her
alive. By the way she looks at me. You’ve got to cheer her up, Mr.
eh....”

“Captain Harpenden,” I said.

“You’ve got to make her care whether she lives or dies. That’s your
business, Captain Harpenden. I’ll give you five minutes to do it in....”
Napier looked from him to me. He scowled immensely.

“I’ll go out to Venice,” I said, but I don’t suppose that Napier,
passing me, heard a word. Conrad Masters stayed a second. Gone was the
captain of men. He looked terribly worried....

“I say, want to play bridge?”

“Bridge!” I said. “Bridge? Bridge!”

He looked terribly worried....

“Well, my wife wants--Oh, wait till I’m back! I’ll drop you anyway.” And
he was off, his brown coat flouncing peevishly. Through the open door I
could see Napier, his coat open, everything about him open, standing in
what looked like a wide courtyard....

“_Mais quelle belle silhouette!_” chattered the old nun. “_Le vrai type
brun anglais. Mais c’est naturel qu’il soit fou avec ces yeux là_....”

Napier and Conrad Masters walked across the courtyard towards a tall
red-looking building. Its door was pointed like a church door, and
windows here and there were alight. Through one of them a nun was
looking at me. On the sill outside the largest window of all, which was
not alight, stood a pineapple and some grapes on a plate.


V

After that chill, stuffy lodge the night was like a kiss. The dark
shapes of Masters’s Renault and Napier’s taxi faced each other, their
dimmed lamps lighting only the darkness. The chauffeur of the Renault
looked to be asleep at the wheel. I hoped Venice was asleep, too. The
driver of the taxi was nowhere to be seen, and stealthily I was
approaching the dark shape of the taxi, mentally communicating to Venice
that it would be only decent of her to be asleep, when the taxi-driver
emerged from the malodorous shape of the _lavabo_. “_Elle dorme, je
crois_,” the fool shouted at the top of his voice, and I bolted into the
capacious Renault.

“Sorry to wake you,” came the mutter of Conrad Masters from the open
door. “Where are you staying?”

Through the front window I saw the door of the taxi close. Napier would
tell Venice he had seen me, and she would be surprised I had not spoken
with her. “You were asleep,” Napier would say, but she would still be
surprised....

“Look here,” Masters said persuasively, one foot on the footboard, “why
not come to my place for a while? Come along, it won’t kill you. A
night-hawk like you. My wife has a party of some sort. Dancing, bridge,
Parisian-Americans....”

Dancing, bridge, Parisian-Americans! The end of a perfect day....

“It’s another form of septic poisoning,” I pleaded. “Take me to the
Westminster, Masters, and let me sleep. And you’d better get a room
there as well and spend the night in peace....”

The taxi in front of us bumped and rattled away. Masters muttered
wearily: “Well, I will probably have to take a hand if you don’t. Most
of ’em dance, but I left three bridge maniacs stranded to come on here.
They stay up to all hours, the blighters....”

Smoothly the Renault picked its way among the pits and chasms of the
fearful boulevards of outer Paris. “Their last chance of ever being
mended,” Masters muttered, “went when the Germans lost the war....”

“All right,” I said sulkily, “I’ll come. Bridge, dancing,
Parisian-Americans.... What a monstrous life you lead, Masters. But what
about that miracle?”

“Can’t tell,” he muttered. “Can’t tell. Seemed bucked up a bit, of
course. Took notice, recognised him, and that’s something. But you can’t
tell....”

“She’ll live,” I said.

“I’m glad you’re so certain,” snapped the captain of men. “I’m so little
certain that I put that young man on his honour to look round again
to-morrow afternoon.”

“On his honour!” I said. “On his honour?”

“What’s the matter with his honour? Looks all right to me....”

“But he’s going South in the morning!”

“He mustn’t go!” snapped Masters. “That’ll be your job. We must give her
one more chance ... one more _piqure_. It’s essential that he shouldn’t
go to-morrow. You must prevent him.”

“I’ll try,” I said “But....”

“But surely he won’t _want_ to go!”

“Oh, _he_ won’t want to go....”

Masters stared at me thoughtfully. “Um,” he said. “Um.”

“Of course,” I said, “you never know....”

“Well,” said Masters, “now she’s seen him once she’ll expect to see him
again. It’s only natural.”

“Of course,” I said. “Naturally....”

Smoothly ran the Renault with the scarlet wheels. The black lion found
in us no little Citroën, cowered before us, slunk back into the jungle
of nameless boulevards. Montparnasse showed lights to hold us, faces in
cafés, singing groups of young men, little flashing women with lots of
hair like dyed haloes. Artists. Swiftly we fled through the darkness,
the stillness, the deep shadows of the phantom fortress of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, away we went from the _ancien régime_, the _haute
noblesse_, across the river to the _nouveau régime_, the _noblesse_,
down the stately slope of the Avenue Hoche into the sweet valley of the
Parc Monceau, where lived the dashing Mrs. Conrad Masters, with bridge,
dancing, Parisian-Americans....

“You can’t,” that man muttered, “expect her to be reasonable....”

“No,” I said, “I suppose not....”

“Nice!” snapped Masters “Good God, ‘nice’!”




CHAPTER SEVEN: FOR VENICE!


I

Fat white clouds hurried over the pale blue roof of the rue de la Paix.
Spring, the first day before the first day of spring, the day that is
not spring but is a voice of spring crying in the wilderness of the
chilly heavens: “Here is spring, and lo! these are the clouds of winter
fleeing before her, white as polar bears, and as stupid. Enjoy, enjoy
_le printemps_!” Anxious the fat white clouds seemed, most anxious,
hurrying from the vanities of the rue de la Paix towards the Cathedral
of Our Lady, that they might pray, the poor clouds who know not that the
pagan gods are dead, the poor clouds, who love the winter, against the
return of Persephone from the arms of Plutus. The stormy brittle
sunlight, eager to play with the pearls and diamonds of Van Cleef,
Lacloche and Cartier, aye, and of Tecla also, chided away the fat white
clouds, and now the sun would play with one window of the rue de la
Paix, now with another, mortifying one, teasing another, but all in a
very handsome way.

Early the next morning it was when I found myself looking upon these
mighty diversions, but I had so much rather been asleep. My bedroom
looked down on these things, but unfortunately not from a great height,
for they are not tall, the hotels of Paris; and men are sent round the
streets of Paris first thing in the morning, to the end that people may
not fail to be aware of the beauty of shuttered shops, some of these men
being directed to push along enormous tin barrels with which to make a
_carmagnole_ of dust, whilst others are placed on ancient taxi-cabs with
especially adjusted gears and magnified horn-power. There is no peace in
the world, that is what it is. There is no peace in Paris.

I lay in bed, staring through the lace curtains. What had happened, what
were the alarums and excursions of that grey day yesterday, which had
leapt at me from the darkness as I made to return to England after four
months of pleasant wandering? Iris was ill unto death, Napier was
enchanted....

Men, some in shirt-sleeves, were taking down the heavy, grey,
burglar-proof shutters of the shops opposite. Set in the small windows
above the shops, the modistes’ assistants seemed to be talking and
talking. Some had hats in their nimble hands, some other things. It is
pleasant, maybe it is the only pleasant pastime that does not ever pall,
to see and not be seen. And now the shop windows began one and all to
glitter in the stormy brittle sunlight which transmuted the pearls and
diamonds on yellow velvet into celestial jewels fit to adorn the crown
of the word _printemps_, than which there is not a more beautiful word
in all the languages of the world. In the great window of _Edouard Apel
et Cie._, whence in the long ago had come to this person such polite but
manly notepaper, stood richly white and coloured papers, boxes of
lacquer, ebony, and cedarwood, flaming quills and great cut-glass
bottles for ink, and many another devise to make one realise how
pleasant writing must be for those who do not have to write. Before a
shop not far from Tecla’s which displayed the most charming baubles of
all and completely deceived the sun, two short dark Semitic men and a
lanky Semitic youth were having some difficulty with their shutters. The
shutters did not look new, far from new, but maybe, I thought, a new
burglar-proof arrangement has been wrought on them, and that would be
causing the difficulty. The traffic had as yet but caressed the rue de
la Paix, and through the open window one might hear the rising anger of
the two short Semitic men with the lanky Semitic youth, an anger which
seemed to call for and to attain a cuneiform language. Then a fourth
man, also in shirt-sleeves, came out of the shop, a patriarchal mountain
of a man with a great black beard and a mighty nose, who might that very
moment have come from a breakfast of dates in a tent over against Ur of
the Chaldees, and instantly I knew him for what he was, a millionaire.
Many were the race-horses he owned, and often you would see him at
Longchamps, talking to a beautiful woman in a deep voice about himself,
for that was a vain and terrible man, and the worst of it was that he
was always right about everything, whether it was a horse, a jewel, a
woman, an antique, or the fall of a card. With one look of his eye he
scattered the two short Semites and the lanky Semitic youth, who were
his two brothers and his son, who were also millionaires, and in a trice
he had those shutters off that window, and lo! there, royally alone
against terraces of dingy green velvet, sat a brown Buddha with what
looked like the largest emerald in the world in the middle of his
forehead, but maybe it was only the second largest. The last time I had
been in Paris there had been a golden chair in that window, golden arms
and legs and back and sit-piece and all, and so it was no wonder that
that man owned race-horses and said “Banquo!” to half-a-million francs
while yawning, and rightly, for he always won, as I know to my cost. And
one night he had come into the rooms at Cannes with a great ruby on his
finger. Only he would, of course, but apart from the ethics of the thing
it was an amazing ruby, crimson as blood and clear as a glass of
Burgundy. “But what a stone!” cried Billee Ponthéveque, a _cocotte_ who
sat at the table losing all the money that she earned by breaking every
Commandment but one, for she adored her father and mother and never
failed to put aside for them as much as she gave in tips to the
_croupiers_; but she never saw her parents, she would say, because of a
funny idea they had that it was bad for her health to take cocaine on an
empty stomach. “Yes, it is flawless,” said the deep voice of that
terrible man, shouting “Banquo!” as an after-thought to some poor devil
who thought he was going to get away unchallenged with fifty thousand
francs. “You can have it, child. Here you are.” But Billee Ponthéveque
had always a sense of the proprieties, and so, as the saying is among
the vulgar, she damned his blasted cheek for offering her so valuable a
present in public, but he said that made no matter, for it was just
because the ruby was flawless that it was quite valueless. “If only it
had the smallest flaw,” he boomed, “it would be beyond price, for any
one can counterfeit a flawless ruby so that no expert can tell it from
the original....”

“_De la par de Madame Arpenden_,” said a voice, and after the passage of
curses and catcalls which are peculiar to the telephones of Paris, I
heard Venice’s voice.

“Venice! Venice!”

“That will do,” she said. “Oh, that will do from you, thanks very much.
Naps told me he saw you last night in that odd place, but did I see
you?”

“You were asleep, Venice! But I am so glad to hear your voice after all
these months, you wouldn’t believe how glad. Venice, how are you?”

“I can’t tell you now, I have to buy things. Listen, child, will you
give me lunch to-day? Naps is busy for lunch. Listen, you must give me
lunch to-day. I hate Paris.”

“But Napier told me you were going South to-day!”

“Oh, Naps is mad!” A boyish voice, a very boyish voice Venice had, even
on a telephone in Paris. “Not dangerously mad, but just mad. I never
knew such a silly, one can’t ever arrange anything beforehand with him.
We are going by the evening train now, though we had everything booked
for the one this morning. Listen, are you going to give me lunch? Oh
that’s a dear. About one, here at the Meurice....”

“Venice!” I called, but she was gone, and I could see her striding
intently through the sombre halls of the Meurice, lovely Venice, like
sunlight, just like English sunlight. And keeping my mind to sunlight,
and avoiding all thoughts of death and dark enchantment, I said to
myself that I would stay in Paris now that I was in Paris, rather than
return to London, for over London lay a memorable fog, so said the
Continental _Daily Mail_, as also it said Hats Off To France, the
guileless thing....

“_De la par du Docteur Mastaire_,” said the telephone this time, and
there was that captain of men muttering, as he had promised he would in
return for my playing bridge till all hours for his sake, that there was
little change in Iris, but what little was for the better rather than
for the worse. “But don’t go thinking,” said he sharply enough, “that
she’s nearly out of the wood yet, because she isn’t. And, by the way,
she seems to want to see you, but remember that you’ll do her the worst
turn you can if you let that boy leave Paris to-day.”

“Yes, but,” I said, but I spoke only to the roar of the Parisian scene,
and I thought: “Oh, well! He isn’t going till the evening anyhow.” And,
still keeping my mind from dwelling on death and dark enchantments, I
renewed my decision to stay in Paris a while, no matter how bitterly my
sister might inveigh against me for letting her return to England
unaccompanied. By now the rue de la Paix was languishing brilliantly in
the stormy sunlight, and from my bath I could glimpse the cars lounging
up and down and women walking swiftly by, intent on errands of the
greatest importance and looking as attractive as only women can look
when they are not thinking of men, while Englishmen and Americans walked
seriously toward the chairs on the boulevards that they had read about
in Nash’s Magazine. Then my sister’s car passed by towards the Place de
l’Opera, and she sitting forward with an air of moment, the ferrule of
her parasol poised above the shoulder of the chauffeur, poor Mr.
Hebblethwaite, who hated the French so! “I will tell her,” I said, “that
I am regrettably detained in Paris owing to the call of my art, my Work,
for I have just thought of a tale about a man who would not dance with
his wife, and would you have me, I will put to her frankly, write a tale
like that in a London fog?”

And it was while debating with myself over this silly fancy about a man
who would not dance with his wife, for some good reason that I would no
doubt hit upon in due course, and while congratulating myself that I had
throughout the morning successfully avoided thinking of any of my
friends’ troubles, that I passed through the soft-carpeted and sombre
halls of the Meurice, towards Venice, towards Venice, where she sat in a
deep chair behind a paper, while in deep chairs all around sat people
drinking cocktails and talking in low voices. All people talk in low
voices when in the Meurice, and that, I dare venture to say, is one of
the amenities peculiar to the Meurice among the hotels of all the world;
but that is as it may be.


II

Venice was in high looks that day, Venice was all of a glitter, and that
was because, she said at first, of this and that. But we had no sooner
passed through the glass doors into the restaurant than she said, she
almost cried, that something marvellous had happened just a moment
before. “What do you think?” she dared me to guess, and when I said that
I thought I would have some oysters she said she was too excited to eat
anything, but might she have some ham and a glass of lager beer?

Venice hadn’t met my sister but once or twice, but they had met again
that morning in some shop or other, “and I was complaining bitterly,”
said Venice, “about Napier, how he made a perfect jumble of everything
by never knowing his own mind for two minutes running, and how we
couldn’t now find any sleepers in to-night’s train--when she offered to
lend us her car to take us to Monte Carlo! She couldn’t bear the sight
of it, she said, for another week at least, and that gives us plenty of
time to get there and send it back, doesn’t it? Now fancy your having a
sister like that!”

“And how is Napier?” I asked. “I only saw him for a moment....”

“I can tell you,” said Venice in a sudden sombre moment, “that I’m not a
bit sorry to be leaving Paris as quick as quick. Naps has been working
awfully hard lately, and here we come away for a holiday and the first
thing he does is to go off the deep end about this old friend of his
being ill.”

“Well, she is rather ill,” I said.

“Yes, I’m awfully sorry, really I am. I’ve never met her, but I saw her
once, one night at the Loyalty just before my----”

“Yes, I remember, Venice.”

“And I thought she was the most lovely woman I’d ever seen, and rather
sad-looking, which made her lovelier than ever. She’d be sad, I suppose,
because of her two husbands and the things people say about her; for
they do say some things, don’t they?”

“_They!_ _They_, Venice, will say anything....”

“Yes, of course, but you know what I mean. And Naps, you see, can’t bear
any one to be ill and miserable, and I’m sure he’s got an idea that Mrs.
Storm is lonely up there, but really, I think, he might consider himself
a little, don’t you? And so I ordered the car at three o’clock this
afternoon, and off we’ll go. He’ll be surprised when he gets here....”

“Yes,” I said, “I suppose he will.”

“Well,” said Venice, sticking out that Pollen jaw, “there’s no use in
hanging about Paris, is there? And so I sent him a message to the
Embassy, where he’s been all morning, to come as soon as he could and
not worry about getting ‘sleepers.’ And as I’ve already had his things
packed we can start off as soon as he’s here, which will be while we’re
at coffee, I shouldn’t wonder.” That Pollen jaw! What, I wondered, was
Venice thinking of when she stuck out that Pollen jaw like that? Maybe
she had been disturbed by Napier’s white-thunder looks when they got
back to the hotel last night and was wanting to get him to herself and
normal as quickly as she could--and Provence, Oh, Provence! It is not
every day that a girl can motor through Provence with her lover.
Venice’s love was like a solid marble monument, and I said to myself
that one should respect illness but also one should respect love, and so
I held my peace.

Napier had not come by the time we had finished luncheon, and as we took
two deep chairs in the corner of the lounge, where we would have coffee,
Venice asked me if I knew anything about the psychology of men as
regards children. When I had picked myself up I said that I would
reserve my defence, laughing heartily the while, but now there was a
cloud of thought over Venice’s mad-blue eyes, and she was ever so
serious, a flat cigarette tortured between her full, pale, dry lips.
Venice, you know, said she hated the taste of lip-salve; but, with no
idea at all of ever doubting Venice’s word, one had noticed that it was
only since her marriage that she had grown to hate it so consistently,
and so it might be that Napier had made a face after kissing her one
day, for it is the affectation of Englishmen to be tiresome about
cosmetics, and if they are not tiresome about cosmetics they cannot be
the right sort.

“Sugar?” I asked, and she nodded intently, her mad-blue eyes absorbed on
a point of the thick carpet.

“How,” I said, “you will love Provence!”

“Listen,” she said sharply. Wise those eyes were now, and steady as
stars in a cavern, looking into me as though judging me, balancing life.

“Well?” I said, to get it over. But what could she know?

She made herself look unimportant. “Oh, it’s only,” she said, “that I
can’t have a baby.” And she looked at me with a frantic smile, and
because every second of her twenty-one years seemed to me to be in that
frantic smile I did not know what on earth to say, saying: “You have
probably been to some silly doctor----”

“I haven’t!” she whispered, so fiercely that an old gentleman nearby
almost spilled his coffee.

“Hush, Venice!”

“But I haven’t been to any doctor----”

“Well, then,” said I wisely, “in that case, of course, I don’t see----”

“Oh, you don’t!” she whispered with her fine, savage impatience. “I tell
you, my child, that I can’t--I just feel that I can’t, in my bones I
feel it, that I’ll never, never, never!” And she put a cloud of smoke
between us to make her smile look plausible, but through the smoke her
eyes looked as though they were holding back a pain.

“Venice, darling,” I pleaded, “I’m not old enough to deal with an
emergency like this. What you need is a man of Hilary’s years to turn
you over and smack you and tell you that as long as you’re such a child
you don’t deserve to have one----”

“I’m so miserable,” she said.

“But it’s absurd, Venice! I mean, it’s just nerves, you can’t possibly
know----”

“Do you actually think,” she grabbed a cigarette fiercely from my case,
“that I’ve got to go to some dud doctor and have him poking about all
over me before I know what’s _me_! Of course I can know, and I do know,
and it’s a shame, and I daren’t tell Napier....”

“You better hadn’t, on such insufficient evidence. I know what I’d do.”

“Darling, darling, _darling_! Tell me, do men love children? Really,
really, I mean? Would Napier hate it if he knew that I was as barren as
that old fig-tree----”

“Venice, how dare you let your nerves get the better of you like this!
I’ve only got to be away from England for four months, and I find you in
this silly state!”

“Oh, but answer my questions! Why is every one so _awful_ these days!
You see, I never know what’s going on in Napier’s mind, never! Do you
think I would if he loved me?”

“‘If?’” I said. “‘If,’ Venice?” Was I now to defend Napier’s love for
Venice? And then I found that she was looking at me with wide-open,
motherly, amused eyes.

“You don’t actually think,” she almost laughed, “that I ever thought
that Napier loved me?”

“Well, I have thought so,” I bravely admitted. “Certainly I have. It is
quite usual.”

“But isn’t my gentleman friend stupid!” she suddenly giggled. “Of
course, I know he loves me--as much as he can ever love any one. But
that’s all, don’t you see....”

She stared at the wounded end of her poor cigarette, and lit another
from my case, as that was handy. The number of cigarettes that girl
smoked, and how she tortured them!

“You see,” she said, knitting together her golden eyebrows so that I
should see, “Napier can’t love like other people--me, for instance, and
perhaps you, though I’d have my doubts about you. I suppose people are
born like that, and you’ve got to take it or leave it. Napier loves just
as much as he can--which means that he’s willing, oh anxious, to do
anything in the world for you--but you’re never quite sure what he’s
thinking about while he’s doing it. See what I mean?”

“I try hard, Venice.”

“Yes. And so, you see, you’ve always got a feeling that he’s keeping
something back in himself, something rather important, if you see what I
mean, something you can’t get a grip on but that’s there to _be_
gripped, that Napier would like to be gripped, if you see what I
mean----”

“I’ll tell you what I see, Venice. I’ve seen it before, and so I
recognise it----”

“But I don’t want to hear about your fancy friends! I want to talk about
myself.”

“The matter is, Venice, that any woman in love with a reserved man will
pass her spare time in ascribing stormy villainies to his secret nature,
whereas generally the poor devil is----”

“Stormy villainies,” said Venice quietly, “is good.”

“Women,” I said largely, cursing myself, “are always making themselves
miserable about what they don’t see in a man, as though what they did
see wasn’t quite enough.”

The full dry lips ravaged the cigarette for a while. Then they said
thoughtfully: “The other night we were dining at Fay Avalon’s, just a
very few of us, and when some one said that Mrs. Storm was a
nymphomaniac Napier went as white as death----”

“And what did the other guests do, Venice? It’s the least Napier could
have done, as she’s an old friend of his.”

“Of course,” said Venice very calmly, looking into her cup as though for
more coffee. “I don’t know her, or anything about her, except just what
people say. And I’d never have known that Naps even knew her if I hadn’t
seen him speak to her that night at the Loyalty. That was the night her
brother died, wasn’t it? Napier had never mentioned her name before--nor
since, if it comes to that, until last night, when he seemed so upset
about her that after a while I upped and said he could go and take a
room at the nursing-home if he liked----”

“Wasn’t that rather harsh, Venice? After all, he’s known her a very long
time, and it upsets any one to see an old friend very ill.”

“Oh, I know, I know!” she said eagerly. “You mustn’t think I was
jealous, but I suppose it just got on my nerves a bit, seeing that he’d
never spoken about her before. And that’s why, you see,” she showed all
her very white teeth in an utterly insincere smile. “I’m rather wretched
about this idea of not having any children. Do listen, _please_ listen!
Oh, why is every one so tiresome! I’m not talking about Mrs. Storm now,
but about the Mrs. Storms of life. You see, they’ve got a lot more to
give a chap than any one like me has--I mean to say, they know _how_ to
bring everything out of a man, how to make him a lover and all that--a
real lover, I mean, a fire-and-ice, pits-and-mountains,
sunlight-and-shadows, nice-and-nasty sort of lover, whereas people like
Napier and me are just the same with each other as millions of other
people, the men being pretty good duds at loving and the women even
worse duds at being loved, if you see what I mean. Oh, I know! A man
might be a just come-here-girl-oh-darling lover with one woman and then
be a marvellous lover with another, just because, you see, she’d know
how to make him be. Of course, with their experience....”

I sat there in that deep armchair, subdued by the thought of the awful
helplessness of men and women to understand one another, and of the
terrible thing it would be for some of them if ever they did understand
one another, and how many opportunities the devil is always being given
of making plunder out of decent people. Here was Venice groping blindly
in the corridors of her love, looking for the one golden key which she
couldn’t find among the treasures there displayed. For there were
treasures there. Venice was quite certain, marvellously certain she was,
that Napier loved her as much as he could ever love any one. Oh, but her
love was quite big enough to cope with that nonsense of Napier’s! And,
since the love of a good woman for a man is a compliment to all men,
maybe I looked at her with understanding, for she gave me a sudden sharp
smile, and said, quite calmly: “And so, you see, if I don’t have a baby
soon I’ll bust.”

“Darling, darling, _darling_!” a low voice mocked behind us so that we
started, and there above our deep chairs stood Napier, and I remember
how he gave me one quick clear look, not in the least a conspiratorial
look, but just a clear look, as though the last time he had seen me we
had both faced a great danger; and between two men there can be no bond
so faint and yet so binding as that which is forged of an understanding
which is unmentionable between them; you may not like the bond, as I
most sincerely did not like it, for it was Venice who was my friend, but
there it is, a bond of invisible wire that cuts at the wrists of the
mind.

Napier looked composed, but always the fever lurked in the dark eyes,
always the dark eyes looked as though they were suffering from what
neither you nor he could tell. That greyhound, sensitive and doubtful
and poised ... for flight! And he somehow looked queerly festive in that
sombre, conventional hall, with his faded I Zingari tie and the brown
Shetland waistcoat which was for the most part unbuttoned.

“Oh, Naps, such a wonder!” cried Venice on the instant, and I saw what
one is so apt to see after an intimate talk with a woman, that one has
only been talking to a mood. Venice was in an instant as I had always
seen her with Napier, impetuous, imperious, gay. “What do you think,
Naps! I have got a car, a lovely car, swift and shining, and a man
called Hebblethwaite for chauffeur. Now what do you think of that?”

“I think,” said Napier gravely, smiling at me, “that it must be an
English car. And what do you intend doing about it? Driving in the Bois?
What?”

“Driving in the Bois! Am I mad! My child, it’s his sister’s car, and she
has lent it to us, and we are going South in it, that is what we are
going to do. And I ordered Mr. Hebblethwaite at three, and I’ve had all
your things packed, and I’ve settled the bill, so we can go right away.”

Napier stared at her--he was sitting now--and it was as though he had
put his hand to his mouth and placed a smile there. It was a very
charming, helpless smile. I said something to the effect that I must go
now, but no one was taking any notice of me. Venice was saying, in a
voice tangled with confusion, impatience, a sort of gaiety: “But, Naps,
you don’t mean to say you want to stay still another night in this foul
Paris, when we might be in the sun!”

Napier scowled, the smile still on his mouth. “Of course, I don’t
_want_, but----”

“Oh, but, Naps, I’d like to go straight away, right away, as the Yankees
say! And I thought we might have tea at Fontainebleau and I’d show you
the place where I was at school....”

“Now look here,” Napier scowled, touching her knee with one finger, “I
can’t quite do that, Venice. You see, I made a sort of promise to that
doctor fellow that I would go and sit with Iris just for a while this
afternoon----”

“Oh, I see,” said Venice. “Well, in that case....”

“Give her an idea--that’s what the doctor fellow said--that some of her
friends care whether she lives or dies, for any one would be rather
lonely up there. What? I went round for a minute this morning just to
inquire, but I didn’t see her, as they said that----”

“I thought you were at the Embassy this morning,” Venice said, in a very
natural voice: and she crushed out her cigarette on the marble top of
the table, and she picked up her vanity-case.

“Yes, so I was,” Napier scowled; “but I just went round there for a
minute----”

“Oo, what a long way to go for a minute!” sighed Venice. “When one can
always telephone....” And she rose from her chair. Somehow an immense
new dignity had suddenly come on Venice. Napier rose, facing her,
smiling under his scowl, as though she had made a joke. I rose, saying
that I must be going.

“As a matter of fact,” said Venice brightly, “as I knew you were so
worried about her I rang up that place this morning, and they told me
she was _assez bien_, if you see what I mean....”

“Venice, that was kind!” Napier smiled with his whole thin, fine face,
and I thought how glad I was that he didn’t know what had caused Iris’s
illness, for would he then have smiled gratefully at Venice for
inquiring after her? And he said, as though happy in her understanding:
“I mean, we can start off first thing in the morning, can’t we? What?
It’s rotten luck, cutting in on your holiday like this, but--well,
friendship has duties....”

“But of course I understand, Naps!” And Venice turned at me, smiling as
though to show me what sort of a man that Napier was. As though she
didn’t understand! As though she didn’t know the duties of friendship!
She said to Napier, with a fine air of business settled: “Well, I’ll
just go upstairs now and tell Mary to unpack some things again. And I do
so hope, Naps,” she said with a fine large smile, “that your friend
won’t die, for then how will I manage a man who has nothing left to live
for?” And Venice turned to me, and her hand was in mine, and we were
saying good-bye, when Napier said briskly:

“Come on, then. We’ll go now. Might as well, now the car’s there....”

“But, Naps!” Venice turned on him, stared wide at him....

“Oh, come on,” said Napier, as though eaten by impatience.

“But!” she pleaded desperately. “But, Naps, I don’t really want to go
now a bit if you would rather stay until to-morrow....”

“I don’t want to stay,” said Napier, quite reasonably, but he turned
away as he spoke. One saw the set white profile. “Come along, Venice.
There’s been enough talk about this already....”

“But, Naps,” said Venice bitterly, “it’s wrong of you to go now, if she
needs you. You know it’s wrong and naughty, what you’re doing. Naps
dear, I’d very much rather not go now if you don’t mind----”

“Well, you’ll jolly well have to go now, if at all,” Napier tore at her
so sharply that she stared at him dumbly for a full second, and then
she made a white smile, half to him, half to me. “Silly baby,” she said.
“Such a silly baby....” And she was again about to say good-bye to the
unwilling spectator when Napier broke in, to me, beginning with
astonishing grimness and ending quite conversationally: “I say, if you
should happen to see Iris in the course of the next few days, you might
tell her I couldn’t stop, and”--here the grimness suddenly ended--“say
good-bye from me. Will you? What?”

I said of course I would, and then he took Venice’s arm to lead her
away. But Venice dragged, her eyes intent on the carpet, and when she
suddenly looked round at me I saw that her eyes were brimming with
tears.

“Men!” she smiled. “Men!”

“Men!” mocked Napier, but he smiled, too. “What?”

“But don’t you think it’s a shame!” she bitterly appealed to me.
“There’s Mrs. Storm very ill and expecting to see Napier, all lonely up
there, and here Naps puts me in the beastly position of a wife who----”

But I was thinking that the shame of it lay in the disadvantage at which
a woman always is with a man whom she loves more than she feels he loves
her, the disadvantage of never knowing how far she may use an artificial
pride, for there is no real pride in a heart in love, without upsetting
the apple-cart.

“Nonsense, Venice,” Napier was saying, and it was his mildness, his
calmness, that was so astonishing now. It was as though the man had
suddenly found peace: as though love-lost Tristram raving in the
wilderness had, in a sudden flash, realised that he was trying God too
far....

“Nonsense, Venice,” he scowled, still holding her arm. “She isn’t
beginning to expect me and she never did. I just turned up by
chance....” He turned to me with that clear, not conspiratorial, look in
his eyes. “You will say good-bye from me, won’t you?”

“Of course,” I said. “I may be seeing her to-day.”

“Yes, just say good-bye,” said Napier, and as he and I shook hands
Venice laughed nervously: “Dear, how serious! I can’t bear
good-byes....” And so she shook my hand without saying good-bye, saying
instead: “You have been a darling to let me bore you with my nonsense,
and I hope you’ll pray that it keeps fine for us in your sister’s car.
See you in London soon....”

And away they went, Napier and Venice, he still holding her arm just
above the elbow, she still appearing to drag a little, across the now
deserted and darkening lounge to the glass doors, which a small boy
opened to them. But the small boy must hold it open, for they stood in
the doorway a short while, as it might be they were arguing, and through
the gloom of the afternoon I could see Napier’s set white profile, drawn
in ivory it might have been, and the way he seemed to be smiling grimly
into Venice’s upturned face, and I could see the way Venice’s face
suddenly lit right up with a smile, just like a garden with the sun
after rain. Now what could he have said to make her smile so, or had he
said just any little thing, which her love, most princely alchemist, had
straightway transmuted into a golden word?

He has said farewell to his love, I said to myself, and now, if love has
left any honour at all in him, he must convince himself that there never
was any love to say adieu to, for even so much would be a disloyalty to
Venice. He has renounced his love, I thought to myself, as a man of
honour should do, but he knows that a man of honour is not worthy the
name unless he can also convince himself that there never was any love
to renounce, for that would make him feel martyred for his wife’s sake,
and that would be a treachery to Venice....

And, smoking one more cigarette in the calm security of the darkening,
deserted lounge, while a waiter or two began laying the small tables
roundabout for tea, I seemed to understand Napier as he were myself, and
he the most different man from me that could well be found. Looking at
the thing full and square, you might say that Napier had done a caddish
thing; in fact, that was what you had to say, looking at the thing full
and square; but it is a mistake to look at everything full and square,
and it is too easy to dismiss people’s actions as “caddish” and the
like, for such are no more than words coined to save people from
wearying their minds with undue thinking, and tiresome people will go on
and on using them with a great show of conviction in the very same way
that they will put down a book by Mr. Shaw or Maître Anatole France and
say: “Look at Dickens!”

Now Napier had suddenly come upon a queer sort of peace following on a
second’s cruel decision not to go and see Iris again, a very cruel
decision, I thought, and she no doubt expecting every moment to see his
face in the clouds all about her. “How like a man,” I could hear a
feminine voice, “first to stain what he thinks his ‘honour’ by taking a
mistress, and then to retrieve his idiotic ‘honour’ by hurting his
mistress!” But, maybe, how could one tell? maybe Napier had suddenly
realised, in the very moment that Venice spoke, that if he went to sit
with Iris even once more he might fall right down into the pit of dark
enchantment and he might send all life but that which he found in Iris
to the deuce and nevermore return to Venice, to whom he was held by
every one of those principles that are born in the blood of a Napier, a
Hilary, a Guy de Travest. And I wondered what I would have done had my
life been so weighted and tangled with people’s emotions as Napier’s
must always have been, and what, I wondered, would I have done had I, in
Napier’s place, been as unaware of myself until a fiercely revealing
moment three nights before my marriage to my betrothed? The answer to
that was very easy, and it was by the measure of the ease with which it
came that I could judge of Napier’s struggle with himself to keep his
pledge to Venice, for never were two men so different as Napier and me.
I, I would have broken my troth, that is what I would have done, and I
would have broken away from any other thing that stood in the way of my
passion, I would have fled father, friends, career, honour, everything,
at the call of the enchanted voice whispering of better dreams. _There
are better dreams!_ For so I remembered a phrase in a book telling of
the love of a lady of the sea for a mortal man: _There are better
dreams...._

A waiter, no doubt wishing for something to do, asked me if I would take
tea, but I thanked him, saying I would rather not, for it was not yet
half-past three, and saying to myself: “In every man there is always
unfolding a dream of things that never were and never can be, since life
will always be what it is and men and women will always be what they
are, and so we will always go on, men of high fancies and low flights,
and the higher the fancy is the lower the flight will be, as it is
written in the Scriptures concerning vanity. And maybe Napier had had
his dream when he was very young, and then the world came along and told
him that his dream was very silly, and so he did not dream any more,
until one night he was appalled to hear calling him a playmate’s voice,
but a playmate’s voice torn with the wonder of life and the sadness of
living, whispering to him: _There are better dreams._ And he listened,
and he was lost, and then he found himself again in renunciation, as so
many Englishmen will always be doing, for it is as true as any
generalisation can be to say of Englishmen that they will often only
find themselves when they have lost themselves.”

I could see Napier during those two days and two nights before his
marriage, I could see him casting his mind this way and that way, to
find that each way lay dishonour, on Venice’s side dishonour with
cruelty, and on Iris’s side dishonour with whatever happiness can go
with dishonour to a man such as Napier; and that, I thought, would be
very little, for can a man of honour embark on any dishonourable
adventure without first of all taking every care and precaution that
neither he nor his companion shall enjoy the fruits of it? But that, I
thought to myself, is a woman’s thought, surely I am not becoming
effeminate!

And you could see Napier scowling as he beat his mind to know what a man
should do, for you might be sure that Iris had not tried to persuade
him, she would have loved him and left him, putting the seal of her kiss
on his lips and the seal of her voice on his ears, telling him only to
do what he thought was right. So Napier would be beating his mind,
always driving from him the phantom of a compromise, a fair enough
phantom, that: how he would go to Venice and tell her that it had
happened to him, born vile, to do thus and thus, and would she please
forget him, for forgive him she could not? But that was just what Venice
would do, proudly and imperiously she would forgive him, and then he
would have to confess the real truth, which was not that he had held
Iris in his arms, but that he loved Iris with his body and soul as he
never could love Venice, that he loved Iris and Iris loved him as though
they had drunk a love-philtre together, and in that way he did not love
Venice ... but Venice, unfortunately, did love him in that very same
way, and you could see Napier just quailing before the cruelty of
telling Venice that, after all, he did not love her. And you could see
him marrying Venice, thinking the while that maybe the best could be
made of a wretched business if Iris and he kept to the promise they had
sworn together, never to meet again. And they had kept to it very
stoutly, the Iris who had plucked the device For Purity from her heart
had kept to her promise, and Napier would have kept to his promise for
ever and a day but for the chance of illness in the obscure silence of
the Paris night; and so it had come to pass that he must see Iris yet
once again, and Iris maybe thinking that she was seeing her lover in a
dream, she who had nothing to live for and did not care one farthing if
she lived or died. But that dream, said Conrad Masters later, saved her
life, that dream was the angel appointed to save Iris from death, for
that time. How wise was Iris, how wise, she who knew that the Marches
were never let off anything. For even the angels were against her.

But it was to Conrad Masters that I had first to break the news of
Napier’s--well, from Masters’ point of view, desertion while on duty.
And very whole-heartedly did that man swear, the telephone simply
throbbing with his pregnant mutter; but I, thinking there could be
little profit in arguing at this time of day that the whole thing wasn’t
and never had been any of my business, merely suggested: would it be any
sort of idea for me to see her for a minute?

“You!”

“But your instructions!” I pointed out. “Whereas, if I may say so, you
have so far been so ‘nice’ to me that I have lost five hundred francs at
bridge on your behalf.” That is what I was driven to saying, but I doubt
if he heard me, the telephones of Paris being very well adapted for
selective hearing, for all he said was that he was due at the Boulevard
Pierre Abel in half an hour, and he would pick me up on the way if I
liked. If I liked! As though, Heavens above, there was one single thing
in all this wretched business about which one might say, with any hope
of being attended to, “If I liked, this,” or “If I liked, that....”




CHAPTER EIGHT: PIQURE DU CŒUR


I

Twilight was spreading her cloak as we passed from the lodge into the
flagged yard. Several windows of the tall red building were already
alight, and on the sill outside the largest window of all, which was not
alight, stood a pineapple and some grapes on a plate.

Within, the feet fell chill on the chequered flags of the hall; and
this, by its size, should have been a spacious-seeming hall, but that
was not the way it impressed one. There was one of those bamboo
hat-stands with a strip of looking-glass running up the middle of it,
but I followed my companion’s example in not leaving more than my hat,
for that was a chilly place. Through a great oaken double-door on our
right came murmurings of a religious nature and every now and then a
woman’s manlike voice raised, no doubt, in exhortation. Conrad Masters
explained that some of the nuns would be at their devotions whenever
they could manage, their religious observances being so deranged by
night-duty and this and the other. “But why,” I thought to ask, “is Mrs.
Storm here, for don’t you as a rule immure your patients in the Avenue
Malakoff?”

“She wished it,” said Conrad Masters sharply. “She has a God.”

And thereupon he left me, to see another patient he had there, but I had
not waited more than a few minutes in the waiting-room, which had that
intangible odour of old cloth and illness, when I was called upstairs by
an old stern nun, hard and silent as a rock, and I remember wondering:
“Good my God, if this should be Iris’s day-nurse. Oh, poor Iris!”

The stairway we ascended was handsome and wide, of polished oak, the
most dignified stairway you could well imagine in a nursing-home. It
swept in a noble curve to a broad passage, also of oak, as, no doubt,
was only fit and proper in a nursing-home patronised by _une clientèle
européenne la plus chic_. But maybe it was a little too dignified, I
thought, it was sombre; and the old stern nun who was my guide did not
seek to relieve the atmosphere, giving me a massive black shoulder and
to my question no more than a stern whisper which was no more and no
less than a shout of disapproval: “_Assez bien, monsieur, assez bien.
Nous nous confions en Dieu._”

The chill, the gloom, the nun, the air of religious prostration, to
which I am lamentably ill-accustomed, had quite killed my spirit, else,
as I did my best quietly to follow her up the long, dark, uncarpeted
passage, I had put it to her that to trust in God is very well but must
He be trusted at such little expense, for in these oaken passages they
had no more than a jet or two of gas-light, and wasn’t it also
reasonable to suppose that the patients behind the doors, each inscribed
with a Saint’s name, would lie the more comfortably for a strip of
carpet along the passages? From below, as though from the bowels of the
earth in labour, one might still faintly hear the murmurings of a
religious nature and the woman’s manlike voice raised, no doubt, in
exhortation; but I supposed the patients would not be minding that for
they would be Catholics, and I wondered if Iris was a Catholic, but
nowadays that is the last thing one ever learns about anybody, whether
they are Catholic, Anglican, Jew, or what they are....

As we came by a certain door, not far from which a gas-jet flamed an
ailing yellow, it was opened from within and I saw before me the
sweetest face that I ever saw in my life, and I knew that her God had
been good to Iris.

“_Sœur Virginie_,” said the stern old nun, and I am glad to say I never
saw _her_ again. Sister Virginie, looking up at me with a grave smile,
for she was very little, greeted me by my name, and do you know that I
said: “Sister Virginie, had I only met you last night I would have slept
much better than I did.”

She had altogether such a neat and tidy look, an inner look as well as
an outer look, that you must be sceptical indeed not to believe at once
that if ever there was a nurse to soothe away death here she was before
you, her hands folded over her wooden crucifix, smiling up at you as
though you were a gentle friend. Her face was oval and so white, but
white in a different way, a soft clear way, and it was only when I came
to think back on this sweet lady that I realised that of course this
would be so because Sister Virginie never had used powder and such
things, and that must also be why she had the lips of a girl, although
what I could see of the dark brown eyes under the nun’s coif showed the
understanding of more than forty years.

“You see, I know your name,” she said. She did not need to whisper.
“Madame has a great regard for you, I must tell you. Now, you must not
talk when you go in. She will look, look. But you must not say one word.
She will see you are there, and it will make her content that her friend
has thought of her.”

The oak door behind her was just ajar, and within I could see a faint
pink glow, as it might be of a deeply-shaded light far in the room.
Across the door, just above Sister Virginie’s coif, for she was very
little, was painted in faded black lettering the name of a Saint, but
what the Saint was I could not make out, and the only other time I
called there I forgot to look.

“Now, remember,” Sister Virginie was saying, “you must not say one word
in there. She will look, that is all. But how she looks, as though she
is listening to the choir of angels!”

“Sister Virginie,” I said, “do you promise me that she will not die?”

And Sister Virginie smiled up at me with a gaiety that I have only seen
on the still faces of women in old French books.

“To-day we have thought she will not die,” she said, “for last night we
gave her a _piqure du cœur_....”


II

I wish I could describe that room in which I saw Iris lying, for it was
such a strange room to find in a nursing-home, and you would not have
been surprised to find the like in one of the hotels in the Faubourg
Saint-Germain. But the truth is that I never yet was sure of the
appointments of any room I might find myself in, except maybe that it
was large or small, that it was panelled or papered or distempered, and
whether or not you walked on a carpet, a strip of oil-cloth or a parquet
floor.

It seemed to me that I must walk a long way to the bed near the window.
It was a great four-poster bed, and it had a very tall head, of carved
oak. There seemed to be but dark wood in that strange sick-room, and the
perfume of wood. Beneath my careful feet was a narrow strip of drugget
slanting from the door across to the bed, but on all sides of this strip
the floor shone vast and brown in the dim light of a shaded lamp that
stood on the heavy oak mantelpiece.

Never was one so little conscious of the odours of a sick-room, but,
although I wouldn’t swear to it, there might have been the faint tang of
furniture-polish, and maybe, as I stole nearby the great wide bed by the
large window, that was the scent of Napier’s roses, which spread their
heads from a _carafe_ on a small table near the foot of the bed. Sitting
against the _carafe_ was a large white doll with her head asleep among
Napier’s roses and a red silk handkerchief tied around her wrist. Ah,
Mio Mi Marianne, unrepentant Magdalen, even the toys of your sisters
heed your dominion! It was dark by the bed, for the light from the lamp
did not reach nearly so far. The blind was not more than half-lowered
down the large window, and across the courtyard I could just see the
light within the lodge and, on the sill outside, the shape of a
pineapple and some grapes on a plate.

The tall oak panel at the head cast a black shadow over the darkness of
the bed, and at first I could no more than make out the shape of Iris’s
head. I could hear the faint hush of her breathing. Boy’s head, curly
head, white and tiger-tawny. But gone now the tawny pride of the tiger,
gone the curls. Very tidily brushed her hair was, tidily swept back from
the forehead, tidily lying on each cheek. It would be damp, I thought,
to lie so flat. Her head lay like a dark flower on the pillow.

She was asleep, I thought, and I was going away, very well content to
have heard the faint but regular hush of her breathing. She had fallen
asleep, I thought, even as Sister Virginie had left her, and could there
be better news than that she was asleep, breathing like a child? Then
how frightened I was, just as I was about to steal away, to see her eyes
wide open, staring up at me. Dark as her hair were her eyes, and almost
as big as her head. I was in terror, real damp terror, lest she should
be taking me for Napier. I did not know what to do, and her great dark
eyes staring up at me. It would be like a stab from the mists about her
to be thinking it was her lover who had come and to realise that it was
me. Then I was happy to see that there was understanding in the dark,
still eyes, she was not taking me for Napier, she was not dreaming. She
was hurt, her eyes said. And, because I might not speak, I just touched
her cheek with my hand, and the hair on her cheek was chill and damp.
But her eyes seemed to wish to be saying something. She was hurt, her
eyes said, but more than that I could not understand, and so I bent down
nearer to her face. The skin was like thin grey paper over her
shoulder-blades, her lips were chapped, and they drooped.

“Dying....”

I shook my head sternly. Her lips were so dry and rough, and now I saw
through a mist what I had not seen before, that her eyes were stricken
with fear. That is what her eyes had wished me to understand, that now
she was terrified of dying. That was what her dream had done, that was
what last night’s _piqure du cœur_ had done. I turned to go away. But
her eyes, dark and stricken, seemed to flutter, then they seemed to look
at the roses on the small table. What is it, I thought, what is it she
wants, and her eyes fluttering like that? Besides the white skirts of
the doll whose head was asleep among Napier’s roses lay the great
emerald and a small tortoise-shell comb. I thought of the tawny formal
curls trembling like voiceless bells before the looking-glass in my flat
above the mean lane, and when I took up the small comb there might have
been a smile on the tiny grey face, like the shadow of a candle’s
flicker. I passed the small comb through her hair, and it passed so
easily through the straight damp hair, and then at last her eyes were
closed and I went away as quickly as I could. Sister Virginie stood a
little way up the passage, but for reasons of my own I did not wait for
her to approach where I stood under the ailing yellow flame of the
gas-jet, but went towards the darkness where she was.

“Were you good?” she asked me, and I think I said that I had tried to be
good. “But, Sister Virginie, she is afraid! She is terrified!”

“Then she is being good, too,” the nun smiled. “She has been too little
afraid of dying, and then it was we who were afraid.” She looked at me
very seriously and seemed to purse her lips. I knew what she was going
to ask, and I did not know where to look. “Do you know, monsieur, if we
will be allowed to give her another _piqure du cœur_? Madame has been
very unhappy, and it is good to have happy dreams....”

I do not remember what I said, but Sister Virginie said magnificently:
“Then I will lie to her for the time being,” and when she had gone I
stood at the head of the oaken stairway, thinking how I would like to be
very alone for a minute or two. Now and then a nun would pass softly but
quickly along the passage behind me, she would seem to be sliding along,
and then there came a firmer step, and out of the tail of my eye I saw
that man’s great brown coat ballooning towards me.

“Well as can be expected,” he muttered gloomily. I looked at him.
“Better, really,” he muttered gloomily. “Ready?”

We went down the oaken stairway, treading on our toes. There was a
sickly whisper of incense in the air, and I found that I had a headache.

“But I wish to blazes,” growled that man, “that you hadn’t let that boy
go. You could have stopped him....”

“No,” I said, “I couldn’t. Besides, I didn’t want to.”

“Mm. Well, how did you find her? Wasted, isn’t she?”

“Masters,” I said, “she is lying there terrified!” For that was all I
could think about, that and the feel on my fingers of the damp, chill
hair that had no waves in it now.

Masters said: “And a very good thing for her she is terrified. Keep her
bucked up, that will. But I wish to blazes....”

“Yes, I heard you,” I said, fumbling with the latch of the great doors.

“Women!” snapped Masters. “Here, let me.”

“I don’t suppose,” I said, “that there are many worse sights than a
helpless woman afraid....”

“You get used to it,” said Masters gloomily, but I was thinking that
Napier would not have been at all used to it, and that he had been very
wise in his good-bye, for as sure as anything I was that Venice could
not have afforded to let Iris have even one more _piqure du cœur_....

“You don’t look so well yourself,” said Masters.

“Growing-pains, Masters. One is always growing up, at other people’s
expense....”


III

I was not to see her again for a while. That man said: “You did her no
good the other day. The reverse. She has something on her mind she wants
to say to you, and she can’t, and it worries her. Naturally....”

“Your instructions,” I said. “She will be angry with you, Masters.”

“When she is well,” snapped that captain of men, “she may burst, if I
may say so. And so I’ll tell her. But in the meanwhile you will have to
wait ten days. Or more.”

It was more, quite a while more, and when I went again into the oak-room
of the Saint whose name I forgot to look at Iris met me with accusing
eyes. She did not turn her head, she just gave me a sideways, accusing
look. Turnings of head were discouraged, she must lie very still, oh for
a long time, for that, it seems, is the way of sceptic poisoning. And
Masters had said to me in the passage outside: “If she as much as moves
a finger, God help you!”

“You should not be in Paris,” she whispered, not without vehemence. “And
why are you laughing, please?”

“Why, at your voice! I do believe, Iris, that it’s stronger than you at
last.”

“Yes, but you should not be in Paris, that I’m sure of. You have waited
to see me,” she complained bitterly, but I protested that never was such
nonsense, for why in the name of commonsense would I wait to see her?
“But, Iris, the very night I arrived in Paris I had an idea for a tale,
and I thought I would stay in Paris to write it.”

“You must tell it to me. Oh, at once. Oh, please....” And the voice
expired. And we waited. “I can’t laugh,” she said bitterly, “because it
hurts. Everything hurts....”

“Iris,” I said, “I am so sorry....”

“Yes.” She gave me a long sideways look.

“Yes,” she said. “But please to tell me your tale. What is it about?
What is it called?”

“No, Iris, I mustn’t tell it to you. It was indiscreet of me to mention
it, and you only just returned from the valley of death. It is a
terrible story. Every one dies. It is about a man who would not dance
with his wife.”

“Yes, but ... Oh, why wouldn’t he dance with his wife? What a silly man!
You do get some beastly ideas, I do think....”

“Please, Iris, be still and good! That man said he would fire me out for
two pins.” So grey she looked, frail beyond frailty, in the gay
afternoon light. It was the fifteenth afternoon of February, as I
remember well.

Never moving her head, only her eyes vivid with restless insurgent life,
she whispered defiantly: “As long as I lie quiet like this no one can do
anything to me or ... fire you out or anything. You just ... stay where
you are. Be brave, child....”

Now there were queer, funny things in the great eyes of the still head.
They were childish, too, and I laughed at them, but she would not laugh,
because it hurt her.

We sat in silence, not to tire her. She lay flat on her back, her head
on a pillow which was so low as to be only a pillow by courtesy. Her
eyes would be fixed on the ceiling, and then she would look sideways at
me, and that was when I seemed to see queer, funny things in her eyes.
They were as though glistening with bits of things ... fear, pride, a
sort of childish glee, a sort of childish naughtiness, a sort of
childish shamefacedness. It was as though she was terrified of her new
toy, and very proud of it, too--her returning life. And then the
shamefacedness, an almost guilty look, as though she had just cheated
some one out of something in a funny way. Not that she hadn’t been very
clever either, her look seemed to say. And somehow I was made a
fellow-conspirator in all this ... in the terror, pride, glee, mischief,
shamefacedness with which she was deliciously playing with her new toy,
returning life.

She said suddenly, in an enormous voice which she had obviously been
husbanding for the purpose: “No one wants me....” And I think, but I am
not sure, that she would have giggled if she could.

“Iris, you’ll have Masters in here if you go shouting like that.”

“He didn’t want me, even....”

“Who didn’t? Masters didn’t?”

“No. God.”

“Oh, I see,” I said.

She panted breathlessly, eager to be talking: “I made my application,
all ... all in order. Forms all filled in and everything. But ... Oh,
they weren’t impressed. Not a bit, they weren’t----”

“Oi, you’re talking too much, Iris!”

“Oi to you. Listen.... The old man said to me: ‘Well, young woman, and
what do you want?’ I wasn’t afraid, not a bit. Had all my forms ready
and everything.... ‘What do I want, Father?’ says I. ‘Why, I’m as good
as dead, that’s what I am. Doctor’s face all of a blur, nurse’s face all
of a blur, temperature 106--why, I _am_ dead, if it comes to that!’
‘Nonsense,’ says God. ‘Never saw a woman more alive in all my life. Ho,
Gabriel! Expel this woman!’ ‘Yes, but!’ I said, ‘I want to die, I do, I
do!’ ‘In that case,’ says He, ‘death will be a great disappointment to
you. We want none of your sort here, young woman. Ho, Michael, Gabriel!
Eject this sinner. She’s still alive....’”

After a long pause I found those great eyes looking at me very
seriously. She whispered: “Owe it to you. I mean, life. Thank you.”

“Iris, to me! My dear, what rot!”

“Not rot at all. If you hadn’t been kind enough to come round again that
night to ... inquire, he’d have called and found only that old nun there
and she would have said ... _assez bien_, and away he’d have gone. And
me, too.... See?

“_And_,” she said, “that ptomaine poisoning. You dear, you dear! Oh, how
I like you when you’re not looking! Genius, I call that. And when ...
Masters told me, I laughed so they had to give me morphia. Darling,
these _piqures_! I got holes all over me....”

“_Piqure du cœur_,” I let slip.

“_Piqure du_ what?”

“Nothing,” I said.

“You’re laughing at me,” she whispered, “that’s what you’re doing. I’m
going to close my eyes now for five minutes. But don’t go. Don’t go....”

It was the fifteenth afternoon of February, as I remember well, and
Mademoiselle Printemps was dancing in the sunlight that fell in a shower
of gold on the window-sill, on which now stood three nectarines and a
large pear on a plate. But the blind was drawn so that she could dance
only in a bright splash across the little mountain which, I ventured to
suppose, was made by Iris’s toes. In the shade of the room stood the
small table, and on the small table the doll with the red silk
handkerchief round her wrist sat sleeping beneath tall sprays of mimosa,
sprays of bright yellow powdered with fresh gold....

“Yes,” I heard her voice, faint, faint, and when I looked round from the
mimosa to her I saw that her eyes had followed mine to a garden in the
South.

“Iris, I was to say good-bye....”

“I know,” she said gravely; and she smiled. “I heard him....”

“You heard him, Iris?”

“Dreams, clouds, mists. Faces, phantoms, fates, words. Yes, I heard
him....” And she smiled, with every bit of her eyes, as though to
reassure me. “That’s quite all right,” she said.

“Iris, I’m so sorry,” I said. “Do you ... promise that that’s quite all
right?”

She was looking at me with a smile....

“Promise,” she suddenly sobbed, and her eyes were streaming with tears.
I was terrified.

“Lie here,” she sobbed, “like a mummy ... no inside left, nothing left
... thinking and thinking and thinking ... trying to lie to myself right
and left, north and south ... can’t have what I want, so must make up
stories ... and you sit there stiff as a pole saying ‘Promise’ ... call
yourself a friend.... You don’t know how ill I’ve been!”

“I do, I do, Iris! For pity’s sake! If that man comes in and finds you
like th----”

“And you think I’m awful,” she whispered helplessly. She stared at me.
“You think I’m awful,” she said quite calmly.

“Iris,” I said, “I like you. Of course, if I didn’t....”

“Of course,” she said, “he doesn’t know....”

“Of course,” I said.

“And he’ll never know....”

“Good,” I said.

“As for me,” she whispered ...

On her forehead there were little beads of wet. I wiped them off with my
handkerchief, and she said: “My nose, too, please. Had my hair waved ...
but it never stays when you’re not well. Got to be well to have curly
hair....”

“And, Iris, if you don’t have it cut soon it will be as long as a
woman’s hair.”

“As for me,” she whispered, “all this effort wasted ... no playmate, no
nothing. Masters warned me, too.... Dead as dead, the poor darling
was....” Slowly, slowly, tears were crawling down the tiny grey cheeks.
Hastily I wiped them away, hearing a step outside. “Nothing, nothing
...” she kept on whispering with closed eyes, and I barely had time to
whisk away a tear from her eyelash as the door opened.

“Well?” that man muttered. “Killed her yet?”

“I think she’s asleep,” I whispered. “Ssh.”

“Stuff!” snapped Masters. “She’s been crying. Out you go.”

Suddenly Iris said in that enormous, preserved voice: “I have not been
crying.”

Masters, whose great brown coat filled the whole side of the bed, so
that I was nowhere, looked down at her like a worried bird....

“I’d like,” she pleaded, “to say good-bye ... to this gentleman, if you
would kindly ... get out of the way for a minute....” And when I bent
over the wasted hand, from which the emerald ring now hung like a hoop,
she said: “Ah, that defiant courtesy! Thank you, my dear. And good-bye
for ever as ever is, for I don’t suppose I shall ever come back to
England again ... nevermore, nevermore. And,” she whispered, “I will
keep my promise....”




CHAPTER NINE: TALKING OF HATS


I

That was on the fifteenth afternoon of February, as I remember well.

Now those who are sensitive to any extreme condition of our climate will
not have forgotten that towards the end of July of the year 1923 there
was a week or ten days when the heat in London was so oppressive that
frequent complaints were made at the confectioners and Soda Fountains on
the ground that their ices were warm; nor were the nights less
uncomfortable--“uncomfortable,” that is, to quote from a gentleman who
wrote to _The Times_ about it, “in a country so unprepared for any
extreme of temperature that, if I do not seem too fanciful, on a cold
winter’s day there is nothing warm but the drinking-water and on a hot
summer’s day nothing cool but the sun.” Of course he did seem too
fanciful, but, however that may be, the nights were certainly stifling,
and one in particular I remember very well.

It was towards eleven o’clock, and Hilary, Guy and I, having sat long
over dinner upstairs at the Café Royal, were returning towards our homes
down Piccadilly, walking as slowly as we might for the prodigious heat.
We had, however, barely touched the corner of Saint James’s Street when
Guy ceased even to pretend that he was walking, and said: “Just a
moment, will you, while I go into White’s to see if Napier’s there, to
remind him about dinner to-morrow night.” But Guy never in his life
looked less like running, and Hilary said: “The idea of eating in this
weather! Hm. And what is this party, Guy?”

“Children’s party,” said Guy, whose frozen blue eyes might conceivably
have made one feel cool had one only been tall enough to be able to look
into them ... and just at that moment, as Guy turned away, and the three
of us facing down towards the Palace, Napier came swiftly down the steps
of White’s, about ten yards down. At the curb a taxi was waiting, its
door swung open.

“Naps! Napier!” Guy called, thinking to catch him with as little
exertion as possible in that stifling heat. But Napier, swift as a
shadow, that greyhound of a Napier, was already in the taxi, the door
was slammed-to, and round it swept by the Devonshire Club to turn
northwards up the slope of Piccadilly.

“Drat the boy!” said Guy, as we made to cross the road. “Catch him on
the rebound as we cross....” But when, as the three of us stood by the
island under the arch-lamp, the taxi rushed past us with screaming
gears, he made no effort to hail Napier.

“Well?” Hilary grinned, as the taxi tore up Albemarle Street.

“Oh, ring him up,” said Guy shortly, and in silence we walked towards
Hyde Park Corner.

I only knew from Guy’s look that he had seen her in the light that fell
through the open window of the passing cab. She had seemed to be in a
black dress and her head wrapped in a tight silver turban, and I had
almost gasped not only with the surprise of seeing her at all, but the
small face in that second of light had seemed so dazzling. “Naturally,”
I thought. “She’s happy....”

Hilary hadn’t, of course, seen her, for he was always at his most
thoughtful when crossing the street. Nor had those two in the cab seen
us, I was certain: they were talking too eagerly. Guy, Hilary and I
walked on in silence, as slowly as we might for the heat. Maybe, I
thought, Guy did not know I had seen her. As for himself, he never gave
away gratuitous information about other people. And Guy loved Napier
like his younger brother.

We were passing by the great gates of Devonshire House that now more
becomingly adorn the Green Park when Hilary muttered “Bed-time” and left
us, crossing towards Half-Moon Street. I found myself walking on with
Guy, despite the economy in walking I might have made by going with
Hilary, for my flat also lay in that direction. But I might cut up Down
Street. Guy said, as though for some minutes past he had been giving his
whole mind to the matter: “Not bad weather, really, if one was dressed
for it....”

“If!” I said.

“Of course,” said Guy, “these infernal stiff shirts....”

“Quite,” I said.

“Although,” said Guy, “I think they’re cooler than those sickening soft
things....”

“I’m wearing one,” I said.

“I said what I said,” said Guy.

Once upon a time, as he had stood at the foot of her bed in a dim room,
Iris had called him by a name that was not his name. “But Guy would
defend a secret not only against the angels of God but also against
himself.” Yes, Iris, yes ... but was it necessary, Iris, to remind him
of it? For Napier was Guy de Travest’s friend, and as dear to him as a
younger brother.

“To swim,” Guy murmured from deep reflection, “would be very pleasant
just now. Very pleasant indeed.”

“Yes. But where? I’m not for the Loyalty, in water debauched by
face-powder....”

“I thought,” Guy murmured, “that I would swim at the Bath Club this
afternoon. I get ideas, quick as you like. But every one else had also
been thinking on the same lines, so you can imagine the crowd. A man
there told me that the best way to get in was to pick on the fattest man
in the water and as he came out slip into the hole he’d made. But I
couldn’t even see the water....”

Tall as a tree, his hat swinging lazily in his hand near his thigh, he
lounged on....

“Sickening,” he murmured.

Bus after bus, laden with the people from the theatres, thundered past
us and up and down the switchback, embracing us with waves of heat so
that one’s very skin felt like a sticky garment....

“Yes,” I said.

“London’s all right,” said Guy thoughtfully, “as London....”

“Of course,” I said, “as London....”

The wide sweep of Hyde Park Corner lay ahead of us like a bright
handkerchief in the night. The buses trumpeted across it and around it
and down it and up it, but one and all looked as snails beside Bus No.
16, which is beyond compare the fastest bus in London, making the voyage
from Grosvenor Place to Hamilton Place and back again at a speed to
astonish the eye of man.

The din that night makes in closing its doors on London was as though
muted by the still, stifling air, and I envied the lofty calm of the
Duke of Wellington where he rides for ever amid his pleasaunce of small
trees. The lights or Constitution Hill glowed like fire-flies between
the leafy valley of the Green Park and the dark gardens of His Majesty
the King.

“Trouble about London is,” said Guy thoughtfully, “that people are
always expecting it to be Paris or Rome or some other place. Always
wanting something else, people are....”

“Anything,” I agreed, “so long as it’s not their own....”

“That’s about it,” Guy murmured. “Sickening....”

We thought about that for a while.

“Guy, one almost might go down to some part of the river. Near
Maidenhead. Now. And swim.”

“Haven’t been to Maidenhead,” Guy reflected deeply, “well, it must be
ten years. Difficult, isn’t it, to realise it’s almost ten years since
that war started? I haven’t been--let me see--not since the night that
poor boy got himself drowned....”

“Only an hour or so by car,” I said, “and you can relive your youth.”

A smile flickered across the stern, small profile. “A long time to waste
to relive a wasted youth. What about a game of squash instead? Makes us
enjoy a drink. Come along.”

And so it came to pass that we bathed quite differently than in the
river by playing squash-racquets by electric-light. Guy has a court in
the basement of his house, and when he beats you, which is always, he
says: “Sickening.”

“Where,” I asked, when we had bathed sufficiently and were enjoying long
tumblers of the stuff that such good jokes are made from, whilst from
upstairs came the faint notes of a piano and a thing they call a
saxophone, for Lady de Travest was “throwing” a small party; “where are
we dining to-morrow night? And, now I come to think of it, why this
sudden children’s party?”

Guy had happened on Venice playing tennis the other day, when she had
said she was feeling perhaps a little depressed. “The heat,” she had
said....

“Whereupon,” said Guy, imitating Cherry-Marvel, “it came to me as not a
bad idea if we had a party for the child. Real good girl, Venice. Hope
that young man of mine will find some one only half so good....”

“Yes,” I said.

“Be a sort of family party, I thought. Hugo and Shirley, Napier and
Venice, some clean and wholesome young woman I’ll find for you, while I,
thank the Lord, will be odd man out. But as to _where_ we should
dine....”

“In this heat....”

“God, yes, too hot for dancing. Just listen to them upstairs! Even the
ceiling’s sweating....”

The faint, slow lilt of the tango, pleasantest of all dances but one
that is so seldom danced in London because nobody in London can dance
it, which seems a pity....

“Might almost dine here,” Guy murmured, “if Moira doesn’t want the
place. And we might, now you’ve suggested it, and if it’s still so hot,
go and bathe somewhere afterwards instead of sitting up in some stuffy
place till all hours. See how we feel about it, and if Venice would
enjoy that....”

“Imagine Venice not enjoying that!”

“Well, we’ll see,” said Guy, but more seriously now. “If we do, it will
mean no cocktails before dinner, no more than a glass of wine apiece
over dinner, and not a thimbleful after. I’m not going to have that
river play any more tricks on my friends, I can tell you.”

“And decency, Guy, will be more than served, for there’s no moon and the
nights are pitch-black....”

“That’s right,” said Guy thoughtfully, and then, as he saw me to the
door, he said thoughtfully: “By the way, you any idea if Venice has ever
met Iris?”

“I don’t think so,” I said. “But I’m not sure....”

There is never any harm in saying one isn’t sure. One should never be
sure, conversationally.

“I just had an idea,” Guy murmured, looking out over the heavy trees of
the great square, “that Iris might conceivably be passing through
London, as I heard from Eve Chalice to-day that old Portairley was lying
near death. The last Portairley, dear, dear.”

“Gerald won’t be sorry to have missed his turn, I’ve no doubt.”

“Poor young devil! But what I was thinking of was, just in case Iris is
in London, that we might get her for the third woman to-morrow
night....”

“Oh,” I said. “I see....”

“You’d quite like that, wouldn’t you?”

“Oh, I’d like it!”

“Just had an idea,” Guy murmured vaguely, “that she and Venice might
meet, if they haven’t already met, and see how they like each other.
That is, if Iris is in London. Different types ... you never know. Tell
Iris, if by any chance you hear anything of her to-morrow. My idea, tell
her....”

“All right, if she should give me a ring. Good-night, Guy.”

“Good-night, boy. Sorry about the squash. Sickening. My idea, tell her.”

As I looked back from that wide corner of Belgrave Square which sweeps
suavely up to Hyde Park Corner, I could see the very tall figure of the
friend of his friends still framed against the lighted doorway. Across
the four open windows above him figures passed slowly.

But what, what in the world, could suddenly have happened to Iris, she
whom I had last seen, whom I had last heard, saying she would nevermore
return to England, promising ...? And one realised, in wondering that
with so deep a bewilderment, how very literally one would take Iris’s
word, how completely one had believed in her promise, as one would have
believed in any promise made by that Iris March who, as Hilary had
reluctantly to confess, did not lie. But now ... nevermore, nevermore!

And as I let myself into my flat, I found myself picturing Guy de
Travest and Iris face to face in a place where no people were, Guy and
Iris completely alone with each other and God. And it was Guy whom I
heard speaking, Guy’s low cold voice telling Iris of certain things, how
he had been shocked that dim morning to hear her whisper a name like a
kiss, a name that was already pledged to another, and how, when he had
long since forgotten her whispering of that name, he had chanced on a
night to see her no further than the span of that name apart from him
who bore it, and how he couldn’t but think that she was committing the
one unpardonable crime of stealing a man from his wife, like a mean
little thief in the night. And I could imagine Iris in her tight silver
turban, like a star it would be in that lonely place where she faced
Guy, and her tiger-tawny curls dancing formally on each small check, and
all about her that dazzling brilliance which will suddenly enwrap a very
fair woman in a black dress, whilst the blood would be clean emptied
from her small grave face as she listened to the judgment of the slender
giant with the cold eyes and the quiet, so quiet, savage voice. They
were of the same people, Guy and Iris, of the same blood, of the same
landscape, and you couldn’t help but wonder how she would face his
judgment, she who had for so long outlawed herself, she who so
profoundly impressed you as not caring the tremor of an eyelash for the
laws of her fathers. Would she, faced by the warrior of conduct, still
not care, or would she be ashamed and afraid, would she be as though
seeing England, her England, the very soil of her England, turning from
her in contempt? I simply could not tell what she would feel, so little
did I know of the nature of that shameless, shameful lady. And that was
again the thought that came to me the very next night to the one I am
telling of, whilst I sat beside her in her car, and we in the van of the
children’s party’s raid on the river. A torment of heat lay over England
that July night, but that is not why we who sped through the countryside
will remember it.

She was driving, and when I dropped a word into the silence of our
drive, for Iris and I were at enmity now--for Venice!--a curious smile
seemed to devour the white profile, to devour it quite: a very witch of
a smile that was, I thought, and more than adequate to meet my word, for
the word I had dropped was what the raven quoth: “Nevermore!”

But as she smiled so, she drove that menacing bonnet ever more furiously
along the road to Maidenhead, so that corners perished like midgets
before our head-lights and Hugo and Shirley, who sat behind, murmured
against her driving, saying that it would be bad for their reputation as
a happily-married couple to be found dead on the road to Maidenhead. “A
friend of mine,” yelled Hugo, “was asked to resign from Buck’s for being
found dead on the Maidenhead road....”

But Iris drove faster and ever faster, and suddenly I realised that the
rare devouring smile that was like my enemy on her face was new to me
who had never before seen Iris smile happily.


II

I have gone too far ahead in the tale of the last March, letting myself
be beguiled from a narrator’s duties by the reckless flight of the
silver stork through the quiet countryside. But from the night of the
children’s party I can only go back by saying that she was wearing that
night not her silver turban but a green hat, yea, a green hat, of a sort
of felt, and bravely worn; and who but I had bought that green hat for
her that very day, she having said to me after luncheon that she needed
a green hat _pour le sport_. I understood that the _sport_ would be
under even warmer skies than ours, for in three days’ time, she said,
she would be on board ship for Rio di Janeiro, and she did not need to
tell me that she would not be voyaging unaccompanied. That was a fell
lady for whom I bought a green hat that day.

Nothing easier than a green hat, it appears, can well be bought. Like a
flash of summer lightning, that is how a green hat is bought. Says the
lady to the shop: “Greeting, sir. I will have a green hat _pour le
sport_, similar in every way to the green hats I have bought here every
year since the death of Dr. Crippen.”

“Very good, madam. That will be so much, madam. On your account, madam?”

“Oh, no! My friend will pay. Farewell.”

We spoke very little over the luncheon we took together. It was a
stifling day, and what, anyhow, was there to say? Very far from my
business was it to speak of broken promises unless spoken to, and very
far from her thoughts did any question of broken promises seem. Oh, but
that was a fell lady who luncheoned with me on that sweltering day!

We sat picking at green olives and salads and bits of toast, we drank
those long iced drinks full of vegetable matter which, apparently, one
must drink so that one may feel the heat more poignantly than before, we
had nothing in particular to say. Early that morning she had rung me up,
a calm, happy voice, demanding from me not the smallest expression of
surprise at her presence in London; although, of course, one did make a
show of being surprised, for she couldn’t possibly know that I had seen
her in that cab, and, I thought, she never would know. The Marches would
be let off that, anyhow.

But Iris, over that luncheon, did not appear to remark that I had
nothing in particular to say. And, what with the heat and with that, I
suppose I grew more and more annoyed, for there isn’t, I suppose,
anything in the world more irritating than to be angry with a woman and
she not notice it at all. Of course many women will appear not to notice
it, but you can see that that is put on; but this Iris just, I’ll swear
it, did not notice anything.

Nor, I thought, did she have a very healthy appetite for one not long
since recovered from a serious illness, the way she picked at bits of
things here and there; but she excused herself to Charles, who came up
to protest against the dishonour she did his food, on the ground that
she never did eat with her meals.

And then there was a moment when I asked, from a large silence which
seemed to her maddeningly natural, I just asked paternally, since it is
always easier to be paternal than to be fraternal: “Happy, Iris?”

She was buttering a piece of _toast Melba_ about half an inch square. My
question stayed her knife. She stared intently towards the doors of the
restaurant for a long second, and then she said, frankly, gravely,
calmly, not at all intensely but with unutterable conviction:
“Unbearably.” Then she went on buttering her piece of _toast Melba_, and
I could do what I liked about it.

Now I must say this for the Iris who sat with her profile to me that
day, that she was a more lovely Iris even than the one I had known. But
as to how she was more lovely, that I do not know; nor, if I knew, could
I describe it but by using the word “ethereal,” to be immediately
followed by the word “unearthly,” for it is a convention not to be
broken lightly that a woman who has not long since recovered from a
long illness must look “ethereal” and “unearthly.” But she didn’t, I
think, look either of those two things. She seemed, I mean to say, more
lovely than ever just because she was more earthy. She looked, I fancy I
mean, in love--her skin, that is to say, looked as though she who wore
it was in love. Yes, her skin did. I fancy it must have been that. A
beautiful woman in love and loved seems, in however unaware a moment, to
glow with an earthy beauty. When writers say that “Gloria was looking
very spiritual that morning” what they really mean--of course, this is
all theory--is that Gloria was looking more earthy that morning, that in
her eyes there was the afterglow of love’s delight. A beautiful woman
neglected or unloved appeals, of course, more to the chivalrous sense in
men, for men will stand more of a chance of a sad woman being interested
in them; but the very skin of a woman who is coiled in love seems to
have a jewel-like quality, and her mind is like a temptation one wants
to touch.

“And,” I said, fascinated for some reason by the faint, faint golden
down on her arm, “you’re quite well and strong now?”

“Of course,” she said, “not as strong as all that. But strong
enough....”

“Oh, dear! Strong enough for what, Iris?”

“Everything,” she said, shrouding a boiled cherry in whipped cream.
“Must get fat,” she explained as an afterthought.

Now there were two red camellias painted on the left side of the crown
of her hat--women at that time didn’t wear bowler hats, or, as they
prefer to call them, _cloche_ hats--which was of the same colour as the
sun, of straw, and with a narrow stiff brim. The two red camellias
looked just as waxen and artificial as two real red camellias would
look, and so it must have cost a power of money, that hat. She would
have flown like the wind to Reboux in Paris, saying to herself: “I am in
love. I must have a hat,” and so she had bought that hat. As for her
dress that stifling day, you would have called it blue if you hadn’t
seen that no colour made by hands could compare with the blue of those
grave eyes, and it was of that fine texture which is finer than the
texture of silk of China, if such a thing can be, and here and there
upon its lower parts were worked large white arabesques in what looked
to an uninformed eye like wool, but surely it could not be the fleece of
the lamb that Iris was wearing that day?

“And did Guy,” she asked, “say anything when you three saw me in that
cab last night?”

“Oh!” I said.

She had very suddenly turned to me, so that at last I must look full
into the eyes that blazed so incredibly blue from the shadow of the
yellow hat ... and I, I could not meet those eyes! I stared instead at
the emerald on the third finger of her right hand, and how white and
frail that hand looked, so weak, so frail, when you thought of it as
belonging to those deep, compelling, unscrupulous eyes.

“Well?” It was her voice, faint, slightly husky; yet it rose above the
roar of London and was lost in the clouds that pass over a strange,
unknown land.

“Personally,” I said, “I liked your silver turban very much.”

“Dear, that was not a turban!”

“Turban is a pretty word, Iris. And suitable, too....”

“Turkey, polygamy?”

“Just a boyish fancy.”

“And Guy? You haven’t told me?”

“But, Iris, he never, as you know, gives away gratuitous information. He
just asked me to ask you to dine to-night, as I have done. ‘My idea,
tell her,’ he said. In fact, he repeated that. And you’re coming?”

“Why, of course!” she said absently, so absently.

“But why do you ask about Guy, Iris? I fancied you didn’t care what any
one thought.”

Throughout that passage her face had been turned to mine, but only now
could I master the courage to raise my eyes from the third finger of her
right hand, to see that her face was as though turned to a mask of white
stone with two amethysts for eyes. It was a mask, that face, and those
were the eyes of a mask. Yet it was far from a mask of concealment, it
was the mask of herself, of her very self, of the self that was, in some
remote part of her being, really herself. And again I couldn’t help
thinking of her as of some one who had strayed into our world from a
strange land unknown to us, a land where lived a race of men and women
who were calmly awaiting their inheritance of our world when we should
have annihilated one another in our endless squabbles about honour,
morality, nationality. Strong were the people of that land, stronger
than the gold they despised but used, deterred by not qualm nor fear,
strong and undefeatable. And just like that was the white mask of this
beautiful woman, strong and undefeatable. It knew not truth nor lying,
not honour nor dishonour, not loyalty nor treachery, not good nor evil:
it was profoundly itself, a mask of the morning of this world when men
needed not to confuse their minds with laws with which to confuse their
neighbours, a mask of the evening of this world when men shall have at
last made passions their servants and can enter into their full
inheritance....

“I don’t,” she said at last from a remote distance, the amethysts
absorbed in the air between us. “I don’t.” And then she smiled faintly,
but even so much was enough to change the amethysts into eyes. “I
don’t,” she said very huskily. “But I just asked....”

“Iris,” I said, my mind charged with that mask, “you have us all at a
great disadvantage....”

Slowly, thoughtfully, she made a circle of air with a small golden tube
that had a crimson tongue, and then she passed the golden tube through
the circle’s heart. She was thinking.




CHAPTER TEN: THE FALL OF THE EMERALD


I

As I think of that wretched night of the children’s party there will be
two pictures that cross my mind. The first, of a group of brightly
coloured people, for we were in white flannels and the women in those
mad, barbaric colours which fashion, goaded on by Chanel and gallantly
led by Captain Molyneux, has lately flung as a challenge to our dark
civilisation, around a table lit by the cameo flames rising from eight
tall cast candlesticks by Paul Lamarie; and I remember that in the still
air of Guy’s great, bare diningroom those cameo flames never flickered
even so much, they might have been flowers of light cut out of the
stifling heat.

The second picture is of a darkness. A darkness torn here and there by
the sudden flame of a match which drove the stars trembling back into
the invisible and joined to groping eyes the silky soft blackness of the
water. The black night pinned round the world with stars, shouts,
laughter, splashings, an empty boat, silence, shrieks, a whisper from
the black face of the water, and so home. Total losses: one stocking and
one emerald. “I’m so glad, so glad,” she whispered, just before going to
sleep against my shoulder, for it was Hugo Cypress who was riding the
stork homeward.

But I have said that whilst we were on our way riverwards, and I sitting
beside Iris as she hurled us headlong through the still night, we stood
at enmity, she and I--for Venice! And yet, so far as I could make out,
there was not a soul but myself out of that party, Guy, Napier, Venice,
Hugo, Shirley, Iris, who seemed in the least degree uncomfortable. Those
people had been, throughout dinner and afterwards, completely and
supremely normal. For all you knew, I mean, they might have been having
fun. There weren’t any undercurrents. Not even what you would call any
undercurrents. Those people were quite calmly themselves, they just
_behaved_ as themselves in that confoundedly unassailable way which is
peculiar to the people of this small island: as though, to be sure, they
weren’t giving away anything of a personal nature even to themselves.
You can’t help seeing why Napoleon found these people so detestable.

And it was all, you couldn’t help feeling, so mean, such a humbug of a
thing. I suppose, of course, that I was the only one besides Iris and
Napier who knew of their departure together in three days’ time. “I have
always wanted,” she had said to me, “to go to Rio, and then across the
continent. One can’t _talk_ in Europe, it’s got so stuffy now. But I
always thought I would keep the Americas until my fate should be
fulfilled.” Yet, I was quite certain, every one at the table must have
known that something was wrong, else why was that fell, beautiful lady
there at all? For Guy, in the ordinary way, wouldn’t, it simply wasn’t
in Guy’s nature to be able to, ask Iris Storm to the same dinner with
the young wives of his two young friends, his _protégés_ almost, Napier
and Hugo. And if he had asked Iris to-night, knowing that she wouldn’t
funk coming--though the real reason why she had come was that Iris
simply did not attach any importance to such things, “and besides,” she
had said, “I want to see dear Hugo again, and as a married man”--it was
just because he wanted Iris to realise the scene on which she was
intruding so wickedly. It is such catholic cruelty as Guy’s that, by
always lopping off the rotten limb, has kept the heritage of so many
English houses almost, despite the common talk of the day, unimpaired.
To-night he was wanting Iris to see that her old friends, her old
playmates, Hugo and Napier, had grown up differently from her--better or
worse, that wasn’t Guy’s point, but _differently_--that while she had
lived according to her nature they had lived according to their country,
they and their young wives, Shirley and Venice. Not the most prejudiced
eye, Guy knew, could but see that they made a fine, harmonious, clean
four. Youth was there, and simplicity, and friendship, and love, too.
And Guy had dared Iris to come to the children’s party merely to say to
her, with her eyes: “See, Iris, here are four people, two by two,
happily paired, friends and lovers, husbands and wives. See, Iris, and
let them be. One of these men you may be able to introduce to the magic
mysteries of love more completely than his young wife ever can. But see,
Iris, how much you deprive him of, how utterly you deprive her! You
have put yourself outside this long ago, you never can be of this again.
See, Iris, how happy they are, and young, and clean, and earnest to do
right: most earnest to do right, Iris, despite the most damnable
enchantments. And as they are so you might have been with Boy Fenwick,
but you chose differently. Iris March, the death of Boy Fenwick puts you
out of court. See, Iris, and for God’s sake let these children be!”

But that catholic Guy had not seen that beautiful white mask between the
tawny formal curls and the two amethysts for eyes. I have told him since
that had he seen that mask he would have foreseen the little profit he
might expect to derive for his friends from Iris’s presence at that
dinner. I have told him how it was in my mind that night that nothing
could move Iris, because it was as though in winning Napier she was
winning the thirty years’ war of her life. The shameless lady had at
last lopped off the limb that was called the shameful lady; and so she
had come again out of the darkness to Napier, she had come again as the
enchanted voice whispering of better dreams, and not all Guy’s Englishry
could hold Napier now from following that enchanted whisper across the
seas, that Iris March might at last come to fulfil her fate.

And yet, by the perfection of their normality over dinner, it might have
been this person, me, who was being treacherous to his friends by
fancying disloyalties among them! Shirley, for instance. Shirley, little
sister to George Tarlyon, was of the same age as Venice, they had been
at Heathfield together, they had always been together, and where Venice
led there Shirley followed, and what Venice saw that Shirley saw, and
where Venice raged there Shirley raged. And Venice was raging now. Oh,
she must be raging frantically! Yet Shirley never once, as they say,
“let on” about her state of mind. She was just Shirley all the time,
sweet in a small way, sarcastic in a large way, Shirley of the brown
eyes and unbreakable spirit, pretty Shirley. Maybe she was behaving a
little better than was her general wont, for Shirley was so well-bred
that she never practised what you would call deportment, but that was
the only way the strain of that evening seemed to affect _her_....

Exactly at what point, one wondered that evening, did behaviour become
hypocrisy? For instance, Guy. There he sat, that knight of old beliefs,
at our head, very gay in white flannels and a brilliant Fair Isle
sweater, for all the world as though it was not already stifling enough,
for all the world as though two people at his table hadn’t offended him
on the one essential point of conduct by which Guy de Travest knew
friends from strangers: never to give way to what you want to do, if
honour tells you that you may not do it.

And Napier, that love-lost man! Love-lost, that man? Let me tell of a
moment after dinner when Venice suddenly, tremendously, helplessly,
cried to Iris: “Oh, dear Jesu, aren’t you lovely!” And Napier, at that
moment gaiety itself, came suddenly between them, an arm round each of
their shoulders. “Why, of course she is, Venice! I tell you, I was
particular about my friends when I was young....” It wasn’t, of course,
voluntary, he was not thinking, Napier couldn’t think and then be a
hypocrite: it was just the natural, normal sort of nonsense that
happens. He had, at that moment, forgotten what he would have to tell
Venice, to-morrow or the day after, of the love-philtre. And the child
Venice! Venice, that very queen of hypocrites! Charming she was to Iris,
just the tiniest bit deferential, as a girl of one-and-twenty might well
be, but seldom is, to a woman of thirty. And yet Venice, ever since that
afternoon in Paris, had been, I knew, eating her heart fretting about
Napier, fearful and jealous and racked by what she could not see of his
heart, tremulous with terror and suspicion of that legendary playmate,
that Iris March of long ago. And how she hated the idea of Iris, I knew
well, how she hated the thing she thought Iris was--and wasn’t Iris just
that!--with all the uncompromising savagery of her heart! Venice, O
Venice! And once, over dinner, she whispered to me: “I like Mrs. Storm.”

I don’t know, of course, but I suppose that in saying nothing one said
quite enough to that.

“I do really,” Venice insisted, but not with enough vehemence for one to
be able to fix on that as evidence of her insincerity. “She gives you a
sense of ... well, completeness, if you see what I mean?”

“Oh, quite,” I said. “Completeness, certainly....”

“Not like Shirley and me, you see,” she said thoughtfully.

“Yes, I can just see that, Venice.”

“Mrs. Storm,” said Venice gravely, “gives one a sense of being a lady
from herself, in her own right, if you see what I mean. Whereas Shirley
and me----”

“Shirley and I.”

“Shirley and I, dear, and nearly every one we know are ladies just
because our mothers were, and that kind of thing. I’d trust Mrs.
Storm....”

And so I was to tell Iris that Venice trusted her! And then, according
to the Scriptures as written by Venice, Iris would feel such a cad that
she wouldn’t after all be able to bring herself to steal away her
husband. She would repent, Iris would, on being told that Venice trusted
her, and she would go back again into the nasty darkness of outlawry,
leaving decent people to the safe enjoyment of their husbands. Dear
Venice, I am afraid my telling Iris that wouldn’t have quite that
effect, she just wouldn’t notice, Venice, that I had spoken; for such a
plot might do exceeding well in a novel, whence you have no doubt
derived it, but in life, Venice, your Iris March isn’t to be deterred
from her chase of the Blue Bird by being trusted. If only life was a
movie, Venice, you would only have to let Iris know that you trusted
her, and away she would slink, weeping.

But imagine that Venice, an eagle in her eyrie, desperately beating her
wings to hide the sun from the eyes of her mate! Oh, but Venice acted
superbly! Not, of course, that there wasn’t provided a very handsome peg
on which to hang the acting. The bathing idea came as a boon and a
blessing to all the company. You could talk about an idea like that, and
no harm done. Guy chivalrously gave me the credit for it, and I was
acclaimed by Shirley and Venice as something they have in America
called, so Venice swore on oath, a “he-man.” But Shirley thought it was
very silly of Guy to go and spoil the whole picnic by insisting on
bathing-costumes. Shirley thought that at length. So did Venice.

“I mean, on a hearty picnic like this!” said Shirley helplessly. And
Venice said it was absurd to go digging about among bathing-costumes on
a nice, warm, pitch-black night. One’s chemise, said Shirley, would do
ever so well. One’s chemise, said Venice, had done very well before. And
one wouldn’t, said Shirley, indignantly, really need the chemise
afterwards, just to come home with. Not in this heat, said Venice, and
they appealed to Iris, but Iris protested that she must be neutral,
because she was not going to bathe; but she would have thought, she
said, that a dry shift was always preferable, when possible.

“Not going to bathe!” cried Venice. “Not going to--Oh, you must bathe!
Of course you’re going to bathe! Oi, you’ll spoil the whole party!”

It was after dinner, and Hugo was doing a few card-tricks with
champagne-glasses, the idea being, Hugo said, to settle our digestions
after one of the best dinners that had ever left him with an appetite.

“Of course she’ll bathe!” said Hugo. “I’ve known the girl all my life,
and I’ll answer for her. She’ll bathe. Leave her to me. Silly, not
bathing.”

“She’s rather common, your friend,” Shirley sighed to Guy.

“Sickening. Cannot bathe, really, on a night like this.”

“Seems to me,” Napier scowled, “that she will have to bathe. Tell me if
I’m wrong. What?”

“Listen,” Iris pleaded.

“Coming here,” said Shirley indignantly, “and not bathing!”

“I am terrified,” said Iris desperately. “Terrified of masses of water.
Once, in the Black Sea of all places, I got cramp, and ever since....”

“If you only knew,” sighed Hugo, “how cold all that leaves us! You’ll
swim, girl. Good for you. Make your coat shine. Give you back your lost
youth.”

“Hugo, don’t be so tactless!” cried Shirley.

“The girl’s right,” Guy closed the discussion. “She’s only been out of
bed about a month....”

“But I haven’t been near mine for longer than that!” cried Shirley
inevitably, and it was just at that moment, under cover of it, that I
touched the ice-cold hand. That was the only sign until we reached the
river that Venice’s married life had tumbled like a house of cards about
her heart, that and her “trusting” Iris.

Venice was saying: “And didn’t we just have some trouble with you, Mrs.
Storm, when you were ill in Paris! Naps white in the face thinking you
were going to die, me green in the face thinking my holiday would be
spoilt if you did, this he-man here purple in the face telling me to be
reasonable....”

“But you were in bed for ages, weren’t you?” said Shirley
sympathetically. “What was it? Some foul plague?”

“Ptomaine poisoning,” said Napier, and as I was giving Venice a light
with which to torture yet another cigarette my hand happened to touch
hers. “In this heat!” said I.

“Shut up, you fool!” she whispered desperately, and then she tried not
to smile frantically, whispering: “Darling, darling, _darling_! My one
friend....”

“Venice, they’re never any real good, friends. They can’t _do_
anything....”

“I know. Oh, I know. Oh God, I know!... Mrs. Storm, what a divine
lip-stick! May I see? May I use?”

Baby.


II

Thus, the children’s party....

Their engines no louder than a whisper through the quiet noises of the
night, and swift as arrows with flaming eyes, two touring-cars, a
primrose and a blue, passed through the villages riverwards. The good
people slept on undisturbed, as why should they not, for a motor-car
will disturb the amenities of a village by night less than a
wheelbarrow. Maybe through the crack of a blind flashed a startling
light on a sleepless pillow. Maybe a distant scream, as of a great
sea-bird, stirred a boy to dream of vain, polite, perishable delights.
Maybe a cow stared thoughtfully at the strange, swift, whirring insects
with the livid eyes and the cruel screams. Here and there the lamps
shone on the buttons of a policeman, stock-still in a doorway. There was
no air but the wind of our passage, warm, heavy with dust and dry
grasses. “Rain, rain!” breathed England in her sleep. And there was no
rain, nor breath of rain, nor yet that damp, oppressive foretaste of a
thunderstorm to come, only a torment of heat over the land and around
the land the unclouded darkness pinned with faint stars. A myriad flies
withstood the stork, were appalled, died. Wrapped in silence, armed with
light, we fled beneath the suns of the night like battle-chariots
rushing to the assault of the stronghold of the gods. Iris had gone mad.

I thought of Mr. Polly disturbed in his sleep, twenty years ago, on a
Sussex hay-rick by the roar of a racing-car. Mr. Polly could have slept
undisturbed for us. One hundred and twenty horses drew us, shadows of
nothing from nothing to nothing beneath the impersonal stare of the
stars. Look away from the stars, lovers of the world’s delights, for
they are the destroyers of the world’s delights with their dreams of
grander things. To listen to great music, to adore God in vast
solitudes, to kneel before the face of beauty, to pass through the quiet
land like an arrow with flaming eyes, swifter than your thoughts: such
and the like, according to each our nature, are the captains of the
world’s delights, so keep your eyes from the stars, that destroy our
delights with their dreams of grander things.

Silence marches with the thoughts in your mind. Maybe a word or two will
drop, hesitate in the wind, fight with the dying hosts of midgets,
perish on the road. Small flying things brush by your face, and a dry
unsweet scent, as though England is sleeping with her windows closed.

The green hat was somewhere beside me, it fell and rolled about my feet,
she murmured: “Leave it.” To the warm wind fell the honour of the dance,
and with the tawny cornstalks the wind stepped a wide-flung dance. Why
does your hair dance so, Iris March, like a halo possessed of devils?
Why this, why that, Iris March?

In the glass of the wind-screen we might now and then see the faint
reflection of Guy’s lamps behind us. Nay, once or twice his bonnet nosed
up beside Iris, just beside her elbow. But the stork cried hoarsely,
flew on.

Again, silent as the rustle of a woman’s dress walking in a dark garden,
Guy’s shining bonnet menaced the tail of our eye, and Guy himself, alone
in front, yellow-haired, grim, fair herald of a fighting pageant in his
brilliant Fair Isle sweater, and now the face of Venice, leaning forward
to Guy’s shoulder, excited, exhorting. Venice, for Venice! She would
pass the lady of the dancing hair, would Venice. But the stork cried
hoarsely, flew on.

We wrestled. Silent as phantoms, we wrestled. One hundred and twenty
horses, a winged Mercury and a stork wrestled for the dominion of
nothing on the Reading road.

There was a corner, proud and saturnine from many fell triumphs. The
stork screamed a taunt, flew on.

“Ho!” gasped Hugo, chattering, from behind. “Steady, girl! Shirley’s
frightened....”

“Let him pass, Iris!” cried I. A little scared, a woman driving, you
never know, might lose her head, boy’s head, curly head, white and
tiger-tawny, but too white, too intent, too infernally reckless....

“Iris, Iris!”

“Can do seventy-five, if you like,” cried the lips of the dancing hair.

“Let him pass, Iris!”

“Pass? Am I mad! As soon let happiness pass! See, the stars are
laughing....”

“Iris, Iris!”

“Let him pass, Iris! Damn you, it won’t hold the road!”

“Why, the road’s fainting with joy! Can do seventy-six if you like. But
not more....”

A new road, recently laid down to soften the passage of
footlight-favourites to the reaches of Taplow and Maidenhead, wide,
deserted of houses. Meadows swept each side into the desert darkness.
Iris, perhaps remembering Mr. Polly, perhaps thinking Mr. Polly had
slept long enough, kicked open the exhaust. That lends another mile an
hour to speed. Another sixty horses gave answer behind, then fell
snarling back towards London. “Seventy-one, Iris!”

“Ow!” she breathed. “Accelerator burning foot. Ow! Hell!”

“Maidenhead!” screamed Shirley.

“To the right, Iris!”

And so we came into the yard of Quindle’s. Still, sleeping, shuttered,
Quindle’s hostelry was a rebuke to the flaming lights which made a
festival of the desert scene. Then Guy’s car swung in, poor winged
Mercury. Shows one, don’t you know, how much gods are worth....

“Sickening, Iris. You had me properly beat that time.”

“But how my foot burns, Guy!”

“Look!” said Venice. “Hist!”

A man in shirt-sleeves was come out of the hotel. He stared at us,
rubbed his eyes, stared at us.

“Ho!” called Major Cypress. “Ho, there! Is that Quindle’s speaking?”

The man in shirt-sleeves came through the flame of the lamps. An amiable
man, he looked.

“Now remember,” whispered Shirley at large, “no matter how beastly they
are to us, we are going to bathe. Let every one speak at once. That will
baffle him.”

“Evening,” said the man in shirt-sleeves. “Bit late, isn’t it?”

“Not one yet,” said Hugo. “I say, we want to bathe.”

“Can’t have no rooms,” said the man in shirt-sleeves. “Hotel’s full.”

“But we don’t want no rooms!” Venice pleaded. “We only want to
bathe....”

“Bar’s closed,” said the man in shirt-sleeves.

“Serve you right,” said Hugo. “But we’ll give you a drink if you want
one. Here you are. Beer or champagne?”

“I want to bathe,” Shirley pleaded.

“Can’t bathe ’ere,” said the man in shirt-sleeves.

“You don’t know about us,” said Venice severely. “We can bath anywhere.”

“Against the lor, miss.”

“That will be all right about the law.” A sudden voice, a calm voice, a
cold, chill murmur. It fell from heights like a douche. The man in
shirt-sleeves tried not to have to look up all the way to Guy’s face.
Too tall was Guy, in that light. Guy smiled down at the man in
shirt-sleeves.

“Hot night,” Guy murmured. “Very hot. My children, all these....”

“Ho,” said the man in shirt-sleeves. “’Ot or cold, it’s against the lor,
that’s wot.”

“Don’t you worry your head about the law,” said Guy. “But what you might
do, now, would be to get us some towels. We forgot towels....”

“Against the lor, anyhow,” said the man in shirt-sleeves.

“I do wish you’d say something else just once,” snapped Shirley.

Iris, a white face, gardenia-white, mocking hair, a barbaric scarf about
her throat, her hat a splash of black against the frail fancy that was
her dress, standing a little away, staring at the stars. “A light,” she
murmured. “A light!” Then Napier was beside her, lighting her cigarette,
lighting also the curious, still smile on his acolyte’s face, an
enchanted smile, the smile of a man drowned in a magic pool. The collar
of his white shirt was unbuttoned, the dark hair sleek in the glow of
the flaming lights....

“Naps, give me a light, too.”

“Here you are, Venice,” said Hugo.

“Oh, it’s gone out! Naps, a light!”

“Sorry, Venice....”

Guy seemed to be shaking hands with the man in shirt-sleeves.

“Get you some towels,” said he, moving off.

Hugo whispered: “One law for the rich, one for the poor. Dear me!”

“Sickening. But we may as well take advantage of what’s left of it.
Getting a bit mouldy, that law.”

“Come on, Hugo. God, it’s dark! Which way is it? We must find a
boat....”

“Naps, this way! No, down here ... but hang on to my arm! Soon find a
boat....”

“You can’t have no boat!” called the man in shirt-sleeves.

“You get those towels,” said Hugo severely. “The way you talk!”

“Please, your arm,” Iris begged me, husky voice. “Foot hurts. And isn’t
it dark!”

“Here you are!” came Venice’s clear boy’s voice from the pit of darkness
ahead, beneath us.

We faltered, blind as bats, down the slope of a landing-stage.

“Matches, please!” Shirley’s voice. Oh, trust Shirley and Venice to have
the affair well in hand! The pit of darkness ahead was bitten by tiny
flames. “Oh, look out, Naps! Ow, God damn you!”

“Naps, you might wipe your feet on your own wife, would you?”

There were uncertainties, holes, fissures of splintered wood. The tiny
flames in the pit ahead were like lance-points thrusting the darkness
deeper into the eyes.

Iris and I marched slowly as the smoke of our cigarettes in the
breathless night. She leaned on my arm, completely. “Foot hurts.” I
wished she wouldn’t. I almost said, “don’t.” Her touch confounded,
confused. She was tangible, until she touched you. She was finite, until
she touched you. She was a woman, until she touched you. Then she became
woman, and you water. She became a breath of womanhood clothed in the
soft, delicious mystery of the flesh. Touching her, you touched all
desire. She was impersonal and infinite, like all desire. She was
indifferent to all but her desire, like all desire. She was a breath
carved in flesh, like all desire. She was the flower of the plant of all
desire. Desire is the name of the plant that Lilith sowed, and every now
and then it puts out the flower that in the choir of flowers is the
paramour of the mandrake.

“You are very silent, Iris....”

“Yes ... yes? Sometimes.... I don’t know, but it’s as though the stars
make me nervous, sometimes. They’re so hopeless. They sneer, I can’t
help thinking. But are we going right?”

The darkness ahead stirred with tiny flames and exultant voices. Venice
and Shirley!

“I say, lovely boat!” cried Shirley.

“Where, Shirley?” I called.

“Between you and me,” Iris whispered, “I wouldn’t mind sitting. Foot
hurts....”

“Come straight on. Don’t go right or left. River.”

“It’s not a boat at all!” cried Venice. “It’s a lovely motor-canoe. Oh,
chaps!”

“Ssh!” Guy’s voice.

Who cared? Not Shirley. “And cushions! And steering-wheel! And
everything....”

“Naps, this way! Here you are! Isn’t it a beauty?”

“Hope no one gets drowned,” Iris whispered.

“Every one’s cold sober.”

“But weeds and cramps and things....”

“And currents,” came Guy’s murmur from somewhere just above our heads.
“But it’s safe as houses as long as we keep in a line between this bank
and the other. Had inquiries made to-day.”

“Sensible Guy!”

“Best way to mend things is to stop them, Iris.”

Our eyes pricked by the wicked little match-lights, we could just make
out at our feet the shape of a long motor-canoe and, at one end of it, a
jumble of figures. They seemed to be fighting, those figures, bent this
way and that in heroic attitudes. The canoe twisted and rocked
frantically on its moorings. Fierce whispers, wicked words....

“Steady a moment,” said Guy, just beside us. But they weren’t steady any
moments, Venice and Shirley and Hugo, whilst Napier helped them by
getting in their way. They were up to something, those frantic figures.

“Steady, I said!” said Guy sharply. That learnt them. Some one in the
boat lit a match, and the water shone like black silk. I saw Napier’s
white face looking towards us, white face, dark eyes. Love-lost,
dreaming....

“Now look here,” said Guy gently. “Just leave those sickening ropes
alone. You, Venice, you!”

“But, Guy! We must get----”

“Must nothing. It’s not our boat, Venice, and I never break more than
one law a night.”

“But--Oh, damn the man!”

“Honest to God, Venice. Now, Shirley, behave yourself! We’ll sit in the
wretched boat, but no more. And the river just here is safe....”

“Look here,” said Hugo. “What about this for an idea? The women have one
end of the boat and we the other?”

“And no matches to----”

“But where’s Iris?”

“Here,” came her voice, as though from the water. “In the middle of the
boat. Very comfortable. Many cushions. I’ll take care of the boat while
you swim....”

“Isn’t she kind, our fast friend! I say, no matches to be struck until
some one gives the word! My figure’s good, but even Reville doesn’t
think it’s perfect....”

“And better hand all your nasty bits of jewellery and watches to Iris.”

“’Ere’s towels,” said a miserable voice.

The canoe rocked beneath us. At our end soft things dropped to our feet,
got in the way. Never was so dark and still a night. It was a relief
taking off even the white flannels.

“Any swimming to be done,” said Guy, “to be done in a straight line
between this and the other bank. First man or woman who disobeys gets a
crack on the head (a) from the bridge over there and (b) from me.”

“This wing’s getting a bit crowded,” sighed Hugo. “It’s a blessing we’re
not French and haven’t nice warm underclothes as well.”

The glow of her cigarette lit Iris’s mouth and eyes....

“I got one foot in the water,” she said at large.

“Taking the edge off our bathing!” Dear Hugo....

“Now, wot’s all this about bathing?” said a Voice.

“Police! Puss, puss!”

“Didn’t I tell ’em!” panted the man in shirt-sleeves. “Didn’t I! Told
’em it was against the lor.”

“Look here!” cried Venice from the pit of darkness. “Don’t you put that
bull’s-eye this way, else God knows what you won’t see!”

“And he’ll never go back to his wife again,” sang Shirley. “I know men.”

“You ain’t allowed to swim here,” said the Voice tremendously. “Are
they, Bill? Out of it, now!”

“I do wish,” Hugo said violently, “that perfect strangers wouldn’t force
themselves on us like this. Any one would think we were at a Royal
Garden Party!”

The canoe rocked frantically. “Damn you, Guy!” said Napier. The
constable turned his bull’s-eye to where he thought Guy’s face would be,
then flashed it a foot higher.

“About this law,” murmured Guy.

“Now, sir,” said the Voice, rather pathetically I thought. “I don’t want
to have no trouble.”

“The very word! I was just going to ask you if it would be troubling you
too much to ask you to run up to your house to lend us some towels. It
really would be very kind of you. Our friend here hasn’t brought us
quite enough....”

Splash!

“Look ’ere,” began the Voice desperately.

“Don’t look, constable! Be strong. Use your will-power. Women are but
idle vanities.”

“Oo!” gurgled Venice. “If you only knew how lovely it was! Come on,
everybody. Oh, it’s so warm!”

“Now remember, Venice--in a straight line between the banks.”

“That’s right, sir,” said the Voice.

“You and your banks!” sighed Shirley. Splash! “Ow, it’s freezing!”

“An’ it’s not their boat!” pleaded the man in shirt-sleeves. “They got
no right in that boat. It’s Lord Lamorna’s, that is.”

“Good Lord, Johnny’s! And he’s kept it hidden from us!” Splash! “Where
are you, Venice? Shirley?”

“Napier, be careful!” cried Iris, laughed Iris....

“Are you gentlemen saying as you’re friends of Lord Lamorna’s?” asked
the voice.

“Friends!” said Hugo. “I won’t know him. We served together in Romano’s
Riflemen, but now he’ll be jolly lucky if we don’t scuttle his boat.
Owes me a fiver. Good-bye.”

The river was warm, soft, quiet. Most un-English were the waters of the
Thames that night, most Italianate. Never before had one understood the
verity of that phrase “on the bosom of the waters.”

From several yards away I could see the long shape of the motor-canoe.
How Lamorna’s creditors would like to hear of that canoe! Hugo would
blackmail him for his fiver. Dear Hugo. Suddenly the glow of Iris’s
cigarette stabbed the darkness, and maybe that was her shadow there, and
that the one foot in the water....

“Who’s that?” she gasped.

I was anchored to her ankle. My hand could have gone twice round it.

“Take care of them,” she whispered. “Dear, take care of them. Keep your
eyes on that Venice child. She’s reckless. Quick, and catch them up. I
rely on you somehow----”

“You mustn’t, Iris. I am enemy to Iris Storm.”

“Oh, friends and enemies! One relies on what people are in themselves,
no matter what circumstances may make them feel.”

“And circumstances, Iris--do they make a woman so heartless?”

“Heartless! That’s a large word, rather. Heartless? But maybe I am tired
of being unhappy. So maybe I walked into a garden and built a high wall
round it. Oh, may be, may be! Dear friend, go after them now. I am
nervous, they’re so young. By their voices, they seem to have gone very
far....”

But from the water the voices seemed to come from within a foot of one’s
ear. They must, I thought, be straight ahead, towards the opposite bank.
Swiftly a whisper cut the water near me, past me. “Young slacker!” came
Guy’s murmur. But I, not for exercise was I on the bosom of the waters
that night. I lazed, listening to the voices ahead, sharp and clear
across the water. Dimly, softly, clammy-cold, a weed would brush one.
The stars were like the lance-points of a mighty host marching down to
the chastisement of the world. But the darkness baffled them, whilst I
floated into the heart of it, I loitered.

“Mind your head on this quay here, Venice! Venice! Hello, where’s
Venice?”

“Here. I say, what’s this place?”

“Oh, my pretty dears, why isn’t one always in the water! I say, what’s
this wooden thing?”

“Looks like a landing-stage to me. What? I say, Hugo, what’s this place?
What?”

“Am I a graduate of Maidenhead, asking me? But let’s try the place,
anyway.”

“I’ve heard there’s a River-Night-Club arrangement about here. Very
exclusive.”

“We know. Excludes all who can’t crowd in. Come on. Me for wine.”

I found them, having almost broken my shins against a wooden affair,
lying grouped on what Shirley said was unmistakably “a sweep of velvet
sward.” Venice, it seemed, was exploring. You couldn’t see your hand
before your face. But you didn’t want to.

“Funny,” sighed Hugo, “if chap, just any chap, probably quite a nice
chap, but timid chap, wakes from sleep to see Venice looking in on him.
Mermaid theory....”

“Wot’s this?” snapped a voice. “You’re trespassing.”

“What did you think we were doing?” Napier asked mildly. “Playing
dominoes?”

“Tell us what this place is,” said Shirley severely, “and perhaps we may
let you go.”

“Gawd, don’t you know The River Club!”

“I knew it was,” said Hugo proudly, “as soon as I picked up a bus-ticket
scented with Bacardie Rum----”

“But where’s Venice?” cried Shirley sharply, “Venice, Oh!”

The darkness stirred, and from the river-edge Napier called on the name
of Venice.

“All right, all right! Here I am.”

“Venice!” cried Guy sharply. “Keep straight ahead towards that canoe.”

“I’ll swear,” said Napier, “her voice came a good way from the left.
What?”

“From the right, and what to you,” said Hugo.

“From the left,” said Napier, and there was a faint splash and a faint
rustle from the water.

“Now, Shirley,” said Guy, “I’ll drown you if you go playing any fancy
tricks. Come along, let’s race back.”

“Naps, found her?”

“Oh, she’s only playing the fool!” came Napier’s voice. “Heard her a
moment ago. It’s all right.”

I think that Guy and Hugo and Shirley must have deflected rather to one
side, for although I was the poorest swimmer of the four I arrived first
at the boat. My sight in the darkness was not helped by bumping my head
against the gunwale.

“Iris! Iris?”

“Hello, where’s Iris? What? God, it’s dark....”

“But haven’t you found Venice?”

“Oh, she’s playing the fool! Missed her....” We held on to the gunwale,
panting. “God, man, where’s Iris? What? I say, Iris!”

“She must have got out to stretch her legs,” I said.

“Yes--God, look!” panted Napier. “What the devil! What?”

Hugo’s voice, Shirley’s, Guy’s.

Napier and I were in the canoe. Iris’s white dress lay anyhow over the
cushions in the middle, over the watches and rings. I stumbled over her
shoes.

“Oh!” sobbed Shirley. “Something’s happened!”

“Naps, what is it?” snapped Guy from the water.

“Iris--I say, she must have changed her mind and gone in!”

“Stuff, changed her mind! Gone in after Venice, you mean!”

“Iris! Iris!” Hugo called. We all called.

“But where’s Venice?” Shirley screamed just as Napier plunged in again.

“Iris! Venice! Iris!”

“For God’s sake, Naps, take care!” snapped Guy. “Don’t go under that
bridge.”

“Iris! Venice! Venice!”

Shirley was sobbing. In the pitch darkness....

“Hugo,” said Guy, “you and I together, for that bridge. Here, this
way.... Naps, Naps! Come back, you fool!”

“Help....”

“God, who’s that! Iris? Venice?”

“Help ... here, to the right....” An exhausted whisper from the pit of
the water.

“It’s Iris,” said Guy. “Where are you, Iris? Here, I’m in the water.
Hold on.”

“Quick ... tired....”

“But where’s Venice?” screamed Shirley.

“All right, Iris has got her....”

Iris’s whisper: “Call Napier back. Oh, dear....”

“Naps! Naps!”

“All right, coming.”

“Hang on, Hugo!” said Guy from the water. “Iris coming. Pull, you fool.
I’ve got Venice.”

“Please, my foot....”

“Hugo, don’t capsize the bloody boat!” sobbed Shirley. “Naps, here they
are! Guy, give me Venice at once! Venice!”

“All right, Guy.” Was that Venice’s voice? “I can manage....”

“You’ve managed quite enough, you have!” said Hugo. “You all right,
Iris?”

Iris was lying panting somewhere in the canoe. Mostly on our flannels, I
thought. But you couldn’t see a thing. We were on the quay, Hugo, Guy,
and I. Then Napier came. A silent, phantom presence.

“Don’t strike a match, any one,” Iris whispered. “I’m in my chemise ...
what’s left of it....”

A sob, a jumble, a cry: “Oh, God, Oh, God! I’m so glad to be back!”

“Little donkey!” said Guy. “All right now, Venice?”

“Hugo,” Iris called, very huskily, “where’s that champagne? Venice
would like ... Child, must you breathe your last down my neck?”

“You saved me!” sobbed Venice. “Yes, you did!”

“Ssh!”

“Ow, I was frightened!”

“Like a mouse in the water. Poor Venice....”

“Here’s another towel, Mrs. Storm,” said Shirley brusquely. Shirley
would be a little jealous now of Venice liking Iris....

“Listen!” cried Venice into the night. “This woman saved me. Saved my
life, she did! ‘Oi!’ said I, and there she was, quick as quick....”

“But, Venice, you’re sitting on my only other stocking, and I’ve only
got two!”

“Pop!” said the champagne.

“Have mine, please do! Like barefoot. Jimmy, I got such a bump on the
head.”

“How?” Guy asked dangerously.

“Against the bridge, please....”

“That’s only bump (a),” said Hugo kindly. “There’s still bump (b) coming
to you, if I heard aright.”

“You did,” said Guy.

“You leave her alone!” snapped Shirley.

“Venice?” Napier’s voice, a white, still voice. He was kneeling, beside
me, peering into the canoe. “All right now, Venice?”

“Yes, Naps.” A shy, uncertain voice that was. She was afraid. “You must
thank Mrs. Storm for that....”

Napier did not call on Iris’s name. Hugo chattered to cover the silence.
I thought I heard Guy mutter something between his teeth. During the
next few minutes Hugo’s dexterity with the champagne was a great relief.
Dear Hugo.

“Venice!” said Guy beside me, chill, queerly harsh. “Your health,
Venice! You’ll need a good deal, if you go playing any more tricks like
that.”

Shirley was saying: “Here’s another towel, Mrs. Storm. Do have my
stockings, please....”

“Oh ... no, it’s quite all right, really. Please, really. But would you
mind seeing if my shoes are anywhere there, by the steering-wheel
thing?”

Formal, like the voices of women in a drawing-room.

Iris called to me for a cigarette. It was her right hand to which I gave
it. It seemed very naked, that right hand. “Your ring, Iris?”

“In the Thames,” she whispered. “Fallen for ever! Not a word....”

Venice was explaining to the darkness, gulping lavishly at her
champagne: “Thought I’d go for a swim and not just paddle about. Thought
I’d be clever. Thought you were fools. Thought I’d thought right.
Thought I’d--anyhow, I caught my head crack (a) on that bridge. And then
I didn’t want to let out a yell about nothing and look a silly ass.
Heard you calling me, but thought I’d better keep my breath for
swimming. Began swimming, and got a weed like a wrestler’s torso round
me. Head hurt, like hell it did. Thinks I, now for a yell, but began
kicking instead----”

“You would!”

“Wait. And my head hurt. And I was frightened to death. And I prayed
like fury. Naps! Where’s Naps? I missed you. And when I wanted to yell
all I could let out was a miow. And Mrs. Storm--well, Iris, as she saved
my life, cries out: ‘Oi, what’s that? Who? Where?’ And before you could
say knife, and just as I was succumbing to a watery grave, she was
saving my life, quick as you like. Quick, terse stuff. She could swim
all of us off our feet, she could....”

“Get very easily tired,” Iris said.

“Iris!” Napier’s voice, sharp. “You dressed? What? Risky for you,
messing about, after your illness.”

“I’m almost ready, Napier.” Impatient, Iris’s voice was, I thought.

“Naps, get a rug from the car. She’s shivering.”

“Please!” Iris whispered, frantically, desperately. “For pity’s sake,
please not!”

Silence....

As we collected round the two motor-cars, Guy, fiddling about with his
starting-arrangements, seemed, I thought, to be saying something. But he
was only swearing.

At the back of the Hispano Iris went to sleep against my shoulder. She
spoke in her sleep: “You will find me quite light on you, as I haven’t
got a chemise. They say it is very smart, to be chemiseless. Already I
feel less of an outlaw from society. She did it on purpose.”

“Iris!”

“She did. Half on purpose. I know she did. The pet! Oh, dear....”

“But, Iris, why?”

“Because, dear. So that I should like her....”

“Oh! Well, do you?”

“Yes. Oh, yes.”

“Well?”

“I’m sorry if my hair is tickling your face.”

“Well, now you like her, does it make any difference?”

“No. Oh, no.”

“Oh!”

“Good-night.”




THE LAST CHAPTER: ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND!


I

Now as I come to that last night of all, a night that was as though set
on a stage by a cunning but reckless craftsman of the drama, and as I
look every way I may at the happenings that were staged on the platform
of that night, I do sincerely thank my stars that it is no novel I have
set my hand to, but a faithful chronicle of events. For it would seem
that the novelist, so he is an honest man and loves his craft, must work
always under a great disadvantage in his earnest wish to tell of life
truthfully; since, as the old, old saying is, he never can dare to be so
improbable as life. He may, to be sure, be as dingy as life, according
to the mode of the day, or he may even achieve the impossible and be
more dingy than life, also according to the mode of the day, but to be
as improbable as life will be as far beyond the honest novelist’s
courage as it must be against the temper of his craft; for should his
characters have to “break out,” should the novelist be so far gallant as
to concede something to the profligate melodrama of life, his people may
only “break out” along lines which the art of their creator has laid out
and made inevitable for them; whereas you and I know that living men
will do queer things which are desperately alien from what we had
thought their possibilities--nay, impossibilities--to be, living men
will defy the whole art of characterisation in the twinkling of an eye
and destroy every canon of art in a throb of a desire: so that we may
make no count or chart of the queer, dark sides of our fellows, nor put
any limit, of art, psychology, romance or decency, to the
impossibilities which are, within the trembling of a leaf, possible to
men and women.

It is not often that I see Venice nowadays, for she lives for the most
part with her father in the country, but now and again she will ask me
to luncheon in her house in Upper Brook Street, or maybe I will call
there on a sudden and find her sitting alone with an unopened book. We
do not ever talk of that night, nor of the two chief players of that
night, but the other day it came about that I found her sitting absorbed
in the shadows of a dying fire, and I somehow said: “Waiting, Venice,
waiting!”

She was crouched like a child in the gloom of a Dorothy chair, and as I
sat in another nearby a friendly flame darted through the twilight and
made toys of her eyes. They were looking at me with every appearance of
deep reflection, but now it was a woman who was looking out at me from
Venice’s eyes, and the woman seemed to smile, and she said: “He is in
India, with Bruce’s expedition. He will be coming home soon.”

And then for the first time we spoke of that tempestuous night in July,
the night but one after the children’s party. But of course I did not
tell Venice all, particularly about the last part, according to the
promise sworn between Sir Maurice Harpenden, Hilary and me.

My clock was about to strike nine o’clock, as I very well remember for I
had nothing to do but stare at it, when the telephone-bell beat it, may
I say, by a short head, and Iris’s voice said:

“Is that you?”

“And who should it be,” I said, “but me? I am so glad you rang up,
Iris.”

“Oh, you are lonely!”

They shout on the telephone, people do, so that one cannot always hear
them very, very well. But this fell lady’s slightly husky voice was
considerate and clear.

“But fancy,” she said, “finding you at home now, and all the world at
dinner or the play! Dear, are you, too, a social outcast? I am so sorry
you have had to dine alone.”

“Iris, you should have brought up the friends of your childhood to a
better understanding of the arts of peace. I was to have dined with
Hilary to-night, and because of my engagement with him I did not go to a
dinner where I was to sit beside a woman who has studied the Yogi
philosophies and was divorced last year in New York with nine
co-respondents, the tenth being disqualified on the ground that he was a
black man weighing seventeen stone in his boots. And then Ross rings me
up at half-past seven to say that Hilary has been called to the
country!”

“Yes, I knew you had been put off for dinner. I was so shocked.”

“Thank you. But, Iris, you knew?”

“Oh, I know everything! But listen, I am ringing you up to ask you a
plain question, and I would like, please, a plain answer. Does it mean
anything to you that I am leaving England to-morrow at dawn?”

“You depress me, Iris Storm.”

“But I, oh I am so gay!”

“Yes, that is what depresses me. My friends are wretched, but you are
gay! Iris, we are all of us miserable sinners, but you are a very
captain of wickedness. Iris, you are a wrecker of homes, and you say you
are gay! I am not being flippant. I have dined alone.”

“Dear, I understand. I do respect your disapproval, you must believe me,
or else I would answer that we begin to die when we are born, that all
comes from God and goes to the devil, and so what does anything matter?
But listen, O father and brother of disapproval, would you like to see
me before I leave England to-morrow at dawn?”

“Yes,” I said, “I would.”

“‘See’ me, I said, not ‘murder’ me!”

“But, Iris, I can qualify nothing to-night!”

“My idea is to take you into the country to-night. We go _à deux_. We go
into a darkness. My friend, there is a sun-dial in a certain garden, and
it is written that you and I shall stand by that sun-dial before we part
to meet nevermore.”

“Iris, your voice is laughing, but you are not laughing. What does that
mean?”

“But I am afraid! I am laughing with fear....”

“And we are driving into the country to escape your fear?”

“Oh, but that hurts! I was never before accused of being a coward....”

“Iris, I’m sorry.”

“Sir Maurice Harpenden knows me better than you do, my friend. Ah, he is
very clever, is Sir Maurice! But you will see. We are driving into the
country, let me tell you, to meet my fear. And when we meet it I shall
not mock, nor tremble, nor quail, but I shall be a very Saint George for
steadfastness. That is the programme, so far. And you, will you be my
esquire?”

“You speak of darkness, of sun-dials, of fear, of Sir Maurice Harpenden,
whom I do not know, of Saint George of Cappadocia, whom, alas, one sees
only too little of these days. I think that you, too, must have dined
alone. And you have gone mad. Else why must we drive into the country?”

“But we go to keep high company to-night, that’s why! Are you afraid of
_that_? The captains and the kings of the countryside are our
adversaries. Sweet, you and I shall stand arrayed against the warriors
of conduct.”

“Not I, Iris! I am for conduct.”

“You lie, dear. You are for love! Oh, why do you lie?”

“Because one must be reasonable, Iris.”

“Oh, because this, because that, because of the persecution of men, the
savagery of beasts, the malice of gods! Free me of your becauses! Lies,
all lies! One must be truthful, there is no other law, all other laws
are lies. We are educated by lies, we live with lies, we worship lies,
we fight for lies, we die bearded with lies. God made men out of clay,
countries out of mud, and what can the son of a marriage between clay
and mud be but Master Lie? Oh, let us have just one look at the
Demoiselle Truth!”

“Unfortunately, Iris, that demoiselle shows a different figure to all of
us. Now I may like her with a trivial ankle, tawny hair, boyish breasts,
but another may like her with golden hair and spacious loins, as Rubens
painted women----”

“I will say this for you, that when you insult one you do it with
kindness. It is kind of you to have described me as your idea of the
demoiselle. I am proud of my breasts, because they are so beautiful.
Life is generally so rude to a woman’s breasts, but it has only kissed
mine----”

“Iris, you are shocking the girl at the exchange!”

“No, no, Miss Dell has prepared her for anything! But you haven’t yet
said if you will be my esquire into the country? Why are you so silent?”

“But, Iris, I don’t understand a word of this!”

“Sweet, do we need to wait on your understanding! Chivalry?”

“Away with that from me to you! You always chose the man’s part.”

“Gallantry?”

“But I shall be gallant to another in being ungallant to you!”

“Friendship?”

“You are driving me very hard, Iris. I do not want to say what is in my
mind.”

“Can you stand there with your lips to the receiver, which I hope your
servants keep clean for you, and tell me you are not my friend? Can you
stand there facing me across Queen Street, Curzon Street, Hertford
Street, Hamilton Place, Hyde Park Corner and Knightsbridge, and tell me
that you are not my friend? I am sitting here on the edge of the bed, in
the next room is Mrs. Oden trying to pretend she is not listening to
every word I say, all round me are trunks and boxes, about me is a
leather jacket with a collar of a few minks, and on my head is one green
hat. Are you not my friend? Answer me! Answer me, I say! Dear, a woman
must have one friend! It is usual.”

“But the emerald is gone, Iris. So you are not the Iris I knew. You were
Iris Storm, you are Iris March, and I never have met Iris March.”

“The emerald was wise. There’s a _galanterie_ in jewels unknown to men,
I see that. So you won’t come for a drive with me? Our last?”

“I never said that, Iris!”

“Ah, I have frightened him! Well, I will come round for you in five
minutes. How are you dressed? In black and white? Maybe I would have
preferred you in something less formal, in something more----”

“Enough of _pour le sport_, Iris! Oh, enough, enough!”


II

And so we were again, again and for the last time, in that swift
motor-car, wrapped in the gentle silences of the night. The oppression
of the heat was gone since the rains of yesterday, but even yet London
could not quite rouse itself from the stupor of the past tropical week.
And to-night the flight of the stork did not torment the hosts of the
midgets, “for,” said Iris from the shadow of her green hat, “there is no
hurry, no hurry at all.”

A clock in the High Street of Kensington was at a little after half-past
nine o’clock. The wide sweep of road towards Olympia was quiet with the
gentle traffic of no-man’s-hour, for such is a little after half-past
nine o’clock. I said: “I do wish you would tell me what all this is
about.”

“It begins a long time ago, it is a long story. Having to do with the
loves of babes, the wisdom of sucklings, and the sins of the fathers.
And the sins of the fathers. But I will tell you more when we come to
Harrod’s.”

“But we passed Harrod’s long ago!”

“There is another. You will see. Patience.” Through Hammersmith and
Chiswick, by Ranelagh and Roehampton, we sped into the veiled
countryside. The glow of London was a yellow arch in the night behind.
We passed the last omnibus on its last journey to a far-flung corner of
the town.

“But,” I pleaded, “I don’t even know where we are going to!”

“Why, to Sutton Marle! Didn’t I tell you? It’s not far....”

“But I don’t know Sir Maurice! Really, Iris, how dare you let me in for
this?”

“It is all right, dear, you are expected. I said to Hilary, not an hour
ago on the telephone: ‘I am not for Sutton Marle unless I may bring my
one friend.’”

“Well, I never heard such cheek! And why, Iris, am I your one friend?”

“Because once upon a time you shamed me of my shame. Because you did not
hold me cheap. Because romance dies hard in you. Because, dear, I rather
like you. And that is why I told Hilary that you were my friend and that
I would not dare Sutton Marle without you, adding that as he had put you
off for dinner it would be something for you to do.”

“Iris, you are laughing all the time, you who told me you were afraid!”

She glanced at me just then, and that second’s smile is like a wound on
my memory. A car screamed and passed us, and she cried through the
disordered air: “I am afraid, but of course I am gay, too! Haven’t I
waited twelve years for my inheritance!”

The flame of the lights on the road ahead made a wall of blackness on
each side of us. I was like a child in this blackness, and it seemed to
me that her voice was the voice of the night. I did not know what to
say. I said: “Iris, that girl will die without Napier.”

Minutes later, she said: “If people died of love I must have risen from
the dead to be driving this car now!”

“Indeed, Iris, how can I argue about love against your experience!”

“My friend, you can’t shame me! For I am shame itself come to life. Yes,
I have lit many small fires to quench one large fire. I have been
unsuccessful. Thank God, thank God for that! And now let the one large
fire burn, with a boy and a girl of eighteen for fuel. Nothing else
matters.”

“My dear, so much else matters! Restraints, nobilities, decencies,
sacrifices!”

We passed slowly through a village High Street, hailed and mocked
good-naturedly by a group of men emerging from an inn.

She said: “In the ancient love-tales and the songs of the Jongleurs we
read of maidens sacrificed on the altar of circumstance. I was a maiden,
even I, once upon a time. Dear, I am afraid you must take my word for
that. And I, a maid, was sacrificed to the vulgar ambitions of a Sir
Maurice. So let us not talk of sacrifice. It makes me sick with anger.”

Not fast, not slow, the Hispano-Suiza swept through Surrey. Then she
said sharply: “But if Venice had had a child!”

I could not see her face, for her hat and the darkness were between us.
But ever so faintly I could see her mouth, and her lips were parted, as
though she was praying. I wondered if she was praying to whom she could
be praying. “She has a God,” had said that captain of men.

“And why did you say that so bitterly, Iris?”

“Was I bitter? Oh, that’s a sin, to think of that angel and to be
bitter.”

“Angel? Did you say angel?”

“I said angel,” she said, and no other answer had I but from the stork
crying dolorously to warn corners of our flight.

“If Venice,” she said reasonably, “had had a child, I would have called
to Napier in vain. We can’t know the beginning and end of honour, nor
what it is, nor what it will do, nor what will debauch it, nor what will
make it unbending as iron. Let us say I have debauched Napier’s honour.
Oh, let us say anything! We don’t stand on words on ultimate nights like
these. Honour is like a little child, let us say, and like a little
child it may be led away by a shining toy, and in this case I am the
shining toy. But had Venice had a child I might have shone like
Aldebaran and called Napier in vain. And that would have been right and
just. We must all give way before children, always, always. Oh, if
people had always done that, what miseries wouldn’t the world have been
spared! Those whose dreams are clean must give way to children, for
babies will carry clean dreams further than the wisest of old men, and
slowly the world will rise above the age of smoke and savagery....”

“But it’s absurd, Iris! What chance has the girl had of having a child
yet!”

“But I am not pretending to play fair! Or did you think I was? I awoke
from my illness, and I awoke suddenly to life. Awaking, I took my chance
as it came. And quickly, quickly, for fear of giving Venice a longer
chance. And it’s because I haven’t played fair that I am going to Sir
Maurice’s house now.”

“Oh!” I said. “Good God! Let me out of this car, Iris! I will walk back
to London.”

“Napier doesn’t know. Napier would be frantic if he knew. Napier is
dining with Venice to-night. They would both be frantic if they knew I
had taken Sir Maurice’s challenge and gone down to Sutton Marle. But I
must go, to make unfairness a little less unfair. I must let Sir Maurice
have his last joy of me. Besides, there is a fascination in letting men
tell the truth to one. There is a fascination in wondering if it will
ever be the truth. But look! Oh, look! There is Harrod’s!”

The car had pulled up on the brow of a small hill. The lights searched
across the road into an unhedged field. Iris pointed along the flame of
light.

“There is Harrod’s,” she said gravely.

“But where is Harrod’s? I see a field and what looks like a giant oak.”

“That is Harrod’s. Not an oak, but an ash. It is very old, and smells of
fairies and moonlight.”

There were once two roads that led away from a certain tree.

The tree, a solitary giant of enormous girth, stood perhaps twenty yards
from the road. Its trunk dammed the far-flung eyes of the car, and in
the light its leaves were made of silver, and you fancied that, had
there been a breath of wind, it had spoken from its ancient wisdom, of
which this night stood so sorely in need; but never a whisper stirred
the countryside.

“Iris, doesn’t that make your passions look ... silly?”

She took my hand, and lifted it, and dropped it. I do not know why she
did that. Her face was hidden. It seemed to me that a long time passed
before she spoke, and I seemed to think of many things.

“If there was a moon,” she said at last, “a little way behind Harrod’s
you would see a small hill, and on the hill you would see a white house.
That is where Gerald and I were born. Perhaps Gerald knows why now. That
is one of the many things Napier and I have to talk out in the
solitudes, why all we men and women are born. There must be a reason.
Across the fields this way is Sutton Marle, where Napier was born. We
used to play beneath this tree, Gerald, Boy, Napier and I. Boy was older
than us, and bossed us. So there was a revolt, and then we made two
camps, Boy and Gerald, Napier and I. Sometimes Aunt Eve, who took care
of Gerald and me when mother died, would take us all up to London, and
we would have tea at Harrod’s. Napier and I loved Harrod’s because we at
once got lost there. And so we called this tree Harrod’s, because we
were happy here, too. We were twelve then. Later on they discouraged our
being together. Aunt Eve didn’t want me to be made miserable when I grew
up by not being allowed to marry Napier, for she knew that I didn’t come
into Sir Maurice’s plans. Poor Maurice, I’ve crashed into them now,
haven’t I! Father got poorer, we sold this house, and went to live in
Cambridge Square. Napier was not allowed to see me any more, but we
managed to meet somehow. Gerald helped, Aunt Eve helped, Boy helped.
That was when Boy first loved me, he said later, because of my
determination not to lose Napier. But Sir Maurice won. I was stronger
than Napier, but I was not so strong as Sir Maurice. He wanted Napier to
marry a rich girl, and Iris March was only the daughter of the younger
branch of a bankrupt house. One day, when I was eighteen, I got a wire
from Napier to meet him here at Harrod’s that afternoon. I borrowed the
money for a taxi--bit from Boy, bit from Hilary--and here Napier was,
white, desperate. In a general clean-up before going up to Oxford he had
promised his father never to see me again. ‘I like Iris,’ Sir Maurice
had said, ‘but she comes of rotten stock.’ I don’t think we had ever
realised before that we were in love. I suppose I grew up in that one
second. But Napier was still a boy of eighteen, while I was suddenly as
old as the Queen of Hearts. I told him I loved him. Dear, I have known
many men, I have married two, but I have only told one that I loved him,
and he was a boy. Poor Napier, so torn, white, distracted. Afraid of my
love, which seemed to him almost unholy, afraid of his father, who
seemed to him almost holy. England, my England! His father was strong in
Napier, and the Harpendens were strong in him. They were stronger than
me at eighteen, and they were stronger than the sweet memories of
Harrod’s. I said to Napier then, just over there where the lights fall
by that trunk, I said, eighteen to eighteen: ‘Napier, I think I have a
body that burns for love. Napier, I shall burn it with love, but I never
will say ‘I love you’ to any man but you, because it never will be
true.’ And what I said at eighteen is true now at thirty, I have never
said I loved him to any man but Napier, for it hasn’t been true. I have
given myself, in disdain, in desire, with disgust, with delight, but I
have kept to that silly, childish boast of mine. I say that to my shame,
but now shame is a weed under my foot. I married because my body was
hungry for love and born to love and must love. And I thought I would
destroy my body with love’s delight, but all I did was to destroy a good
man. Hector Storm went off to Ireland and died because one night in my
sleep I whispered Napier’s name. Or perhaps I had whispered it many
nights. I told him that he was being jealous of a ghost, but he wouldn’t
believe. Now all those things are passed. The nymph unloosened her
girdle to desire, and now she has unloosened it to her only love. One
grows out of everything, even desire: and then one can love. Look,
Harrod’s is smiling, all silver and smiling! Here Sir Maurice sacrificed
me twelve years ago. To-night I have to say to him: ‘This is what you
have done, Maurice--the unhappiness of Venice, the unhappiness of your
son, and twelve years of hell for me. Are you content?’ Oh God, it’s
been hell, these twelve years! If you had kissed hell, as I have kissed
hell, if you had sacrificed to hell, as I have sacrificed my body to
hell, you would know what I mean. But now I can’t grudge Maurice the
final satisfaction of telling me what he thinks of me. Dear, it matters
so little what men like Maurice think of one. They worship all that is
despicable, they despise all that is really good. From the beginning of
time this world has been wounded by the manliness of fools. Oh, let
Maurice have his say to-night! And mighty Guy. And my sweet Hilary! Let
them have their say. I can only answer them with love. How could I
answer them but with love? But I can silence them with love! Love, love,
love! A glorious word, a matchless word! But isn’t it? Love, love! I am
in love. I glory in love, I will die in love! Love, my sweet, love,
love! To be in love as I am in love is to be in heaven before hell was
made. I am in love!”

The car rushed on, up a wide slope that curved handsomely so that the
light played on meadows and startled the beasts of the fields.

“And you are so sure, Iris, that these three men, who have known you all
your life and one of whom has loved you with all his heart ever since he
saw you walk down South Audley Street, all brown stockings and blue
eyes--you are so sure, Iris, that nothing they can say will touch you?”

The lights swept over great lodge-gates standing wide open before a
curving avenue of tall trees. We passed beneath them, showering gold on
their trunks. The drive shone like a yellow carpet beneath our lights.

“I tell you,” Iris whispered, “I shall be a very Saint George for
steadfastness!”

The stork fled up the curving avenue of Sutton Marle. It seemed, to me,
to crouch with fear beneath the noble line of trees. They stood above us
like towers. I was afraid.

“This is the lion’s den, Iris!”

“Well, I have killed lions, and tigers too, in twelve years’ wandering
through hell.”

“But this is the den of the king of lions, Iris! This is the den of the
lion of England!”

“Love smiles at lions. Love can never be a clown, but a lion can wear an
ass’s skin. Darling, I’m no good at natural history, but I have studied
history.”

“You couldn’t mock it so unless you loved it very deeply. You are like a
child, dear Iris, daring her father and mother. These trees----”

“But I laugh at the trees of Sutton Marle! I always did, I never could
play with them, not even believe in them. I tell you, there is no tree
but Harrod’s, my servant, and my master and my playmate tree, Harrod’s.
Oh, how Harrod’s hates Sir Maurice! It makes me afraid, to think how
Harrod’s hates Maurice Harpenden. Let him beware as he walks beneath
it!”

Then the trees parted from above us and we came into an open place where
stood a fountain, and round the fountain we swept a circle and came
before the doors of a long white manor house. De Travest’s car stood
there. As we drew up beside it the doors of the white house opened and a
fat old man stood at the head of the steps. His hair was like his house,
quite white.

“Truble, we will go round by the garden,” Iris said.

The fat old butler looked very gravely down at Iris. She was like a
small knight at the foot of the broad steps, he a kindly old dragon up
above. Oh, he looked so grave!

Iris said to me: “Mr. Truble is my oldest friend. He is a very nice man.
Truble, what have you to say to that?”

“Sir Maurice did not expect you, Miss Iris.”

“How, Truble! Sir Maurice knew I was coming!”

“But he did not think you would come, Miss Iris. But his lordship
expected you. The gentlemen are in the library.”

“His lordship, Truble, does me too much honour in thinking I can keep my
word.... Truble, my dear!”

I had been looking round me when that sudden cry shook me like the cry
of a bird in pain. The fat old butler was weeping, there was not a doubt
of it. There at the head of the broad steps, quite motionless, a broad
black shape under his white hair. Iris had him by the shoulder, was
shaking him, her hat like a toy against that black shape.

“Truble,” she said, so huskily, “that I should ever have made you cry!
My dear, my dear!”

“Sir,” the old man appealed to me down below with a funnily out-flung
hand. “I never was so ashamed of myself in my life! But it came on me
all of a sudden hearing Miss Iris say, here at the doors of Sutton
Marle, in a voice as hard as that ash she was always in love with, that
about his lordship doing her too much honour about her keeping her
word. I held Miss Iris in my arms, sir, when she wasn’t above a year
old, and now--I’m sure I beg your pardon, sir. And yours, Miss Iris. I’m
sure I don’t know what’s come over me to-night....”

One leather arm had the old man by the shoulder. Iris’s face seemed
painted white.

“Truble,” she said, so huskily, “I am so sorry to have upset you. You
have been faithful to me, Truble, for thirty years, and now, I suppose,
you mustn’t love me any more. You don’t love me any more, Truble?”

“Miss Iris, Miss Iris! There’s no good comes from loving, I see that!”

“Then, Truble, I here and now do release you from giving me a thought
ever again. Adieu, Truble.”

Her face painted white, her eyes absorbed in what they did not see, she
came down to where I stood. “Come,” she said, expressionless. She could
make her words into pieces of iron, and I did not dare to look at the
motionless old man at the head of the steps. We skirted the house in
silence. I supposed we were on a lawn. The rains of yesterday had not
softened the drought, the grass was hard as stone under the feet. I
said: “Iris, you are moved already--you who were not to be moved by
anything that was said!”

I felt her fingers tightening round my arm. Hers were strong white
fingers. “I hadn’t bargained for Truble. He should have been in bed by
now. Often in moments of self-hatred and contempt I have taken a little
heart from that old man’s devotion. And he would always send me wishes
on my birthday. No, I hadn’t bargained for Truble.... Look!”

“Why, they are playing bridge!”

“And, dear, how grimly! See, Hilary is looking quite young, he must have
a bad hand. And Guy Apollo Belvedere--Oh, he’s thinking!--and then he
plays the wrong card! Ah, poor Guy! He always did treat his trumps as
though they were tulips, with too much respect. And Sir Maurice! Now,
dear heart, what do you think of Sir Maurice? Isn’t he the handsome
soldier!”

“Oh, handsome! Napier with a gay sinner’s face....”

“Judge him for me! Oh, do! Here we are, conspirators, whispering. Now,
judge me, first, Mr. Townshend of Magralt.”

“Iris, must I! Can I? I can’t!”

“Of course you must, can, will! Speak without thinking. It is only thus
that truth is made.”

“He is a good man. His goodness is supported by his principles, his
kindness is rebuked by his prejudices. He is not a weak man, but he is
the weakest man in that room. He has loved but one woman in his life,
and she has crucified his heart on a hundred carnal Calvarys. But he
still loves her, and that is why he is the weakest man in that room.”

“And you, satyr, you are the cruellest man I ever met in my life! But
judge me, secondly, my lord Viscount de Travest.”

“He is the elder brother of honour. He is that rarest of men, a
schoolboy who has grown out of his schooldays but remains, by strength
of will, a schoolboy. He prefers to be that. He never did an unworthy
thing, and has thought less mean ones than most people. Like all decent
Englishmen, he is like a woman: he knows everything without ever having
been taught anything. He has a profound sense of obedience, therefore he
is a good commander. He never thinks when he is alone, lest thoughts
should undermine his sense of obedience and paralyse his habit of
command. One day a thought will strike him, and instantly he will cease
to be the captain of his soul. He is the only man in England who
actually believes in obeying the King.”

“Oh, how horrified the King would be! And of Sir Maurice, enemy to Iris
March, what have you to say? Besides the fact that he is the cleverest
man in that room. Oh, he is clever, that Maurice! It was he who had old
Truble waiting for me. Judge me that man!”

“But I don’t know him, Iris!”

“His face is there, man--the proconsular features, the cunning Norman
nose, the smile--Oh, my God, the smile! And you won’t, my friend, take
my opinion of him?”

“Iris, how can you ask me to do that! We can’t take any woman’s opinion
of any man. They find evil in good men, they overlook the vices of
cads....”

“Oh, Maurice is not good, not bad! Only immemorially infantile, like all
successful men....”

Where we stood now the lawn was damp and velvet-soft, the air whispered
of flowers. The light that fell across the lawn from the three tall
French-windows reached almost to our feet. It was a long, oak-panelled,
scholarly room in which the three men sat, towards one side, about a
card-table. They were absorbed in their game, silent figures of black
and white. Yes, the fine profile of Sir Maurice seemed apt to smile.
Iris murmured: “We will wait for them to finish their game.”

As my hand moved to throw away a cigarette I touched a cold stone, and I
saw that we were standing by a sun-dial. Iris was looking at me, and
clearest of all the happenings of that night I remember that long moment
of Iris’s looking, and how, as I looked into her eyes, her beauty seemed
to enwrap itself with the whisper of the flowers and enter into my
being, so that I cared not for right nor wrong. My hand rested on the
sun-dial. She laid her hand on mine, and her hand was colder than the
sun-dial.


III

Sir Maurice received me very kindly. I had thought, seeing him at the
card-table, that he was a tall man; but he was small, slight, taut; very
ready to smile. He offered me a cigar, which I was very pleased to take.
Iris said she would not smoke just yet. No one sat down, but every one
seemed at his ease. It was as though Iris and I were paying an evening
call. Hilary apologised to me about dinner. I forgave him. Somehow,
suddenly, I found myself absorbed by Guy and Hilary. I found that Iris
was alone. It was as though her green hat stamped her aloneness with a
light. How bright that green hat looked in that scholarly room, like a
green flower, like a green flame! Iris stood by the card-table, on which
the cards were scattered face-upwards.

“Good of you to come, Iris,” the General said. He smiled very easily. He
was one of those young old men who are very old when you look close. He
was charming.

Iris looked up from the cards across the room to Hilary. Her eyes were
untroubled and clear, she was very still, and her lips were silken red.
She said: “Hilary asked me. So I came.”

“It was my idea, Iris,” Sir Maurice said, and he smiled. He was
fidgeting with a black ebony paper-knife. “My idea entirely. Hilary was
against it. Very glad you brought our young friend. Sit down, Iris. We
are all of the world here, we are civilised people. Let’s talk about
this like civilised people.”

Iris did not sit down. Maybe some one sat down, but I don’t remember.
Iris picked up the ace of clubs from the table and looked at it
thoughtfully.

“That was really why I came, Maurice. Because it must have been your
idea. You are a very clever man. It was thoughtful of you to give me a
chance of saying good-bye to Truble.” She looked up from the ace of
clubs to Guy with her untroubled eyes. She had not once looked at Sir
Maurice. “Guy, what have you to say to me? I think you have wanted to
say something to me for a long time. It would have been cowardly to
leave England for good without giving you the chance.”

“Iris,” said Hilary sharply, “Guy has always been very kind about you.
Hm. Much kinder than I’ve been.”

“Yes, dear,” she smiled so suddenly at Hilary. That was a surprising,
complete smile. It excluded us all, it excluded even Iris and Hilary, it
excluded every one but the friend of childhood and a long little thing,
all brown stockings and blue eyes. That was a true smile. “Hm,” said
Hilary.

Sir Maurice put a whisky-and-soda into my hand, but I do not remember
tasting it. The slight, poised old gentleman’s smile troubled me. His
was too fine a face to smile like that. He had clever, darting eyes. I
felt that Iris was making an effort to keep her eyes from him. And I
felt that the two enemies were each terrified of the other.

Guy spoke for the first time, he murmured: “It was brave of you to come,
Iris. I don’t know much about using words, but I think it was noble of
you to come. I don’t know any other woman who would have even thought of
accepting Maurice’s invitation. But we, your friends, have never
compared you to other women. In some things to their disadvantage. We
have always admired your pluck. But we have admired your candour and
honesty even more. That is why this sickening business baffles us so.
Maurice and I just thought it might be fair both to us and to you if we
were to try to clear it up a little.” And then Guy snapped: “I’m damned
if I want to hate you, Iris.”

Iris broke the back of the ace of clubs and dropped it among the others
on the green cloth, where it lay cruelly curled.

“Steady, Iris, steady!” said Sir Maurice. And he tried with the black
ebony paper-knife to straighten out the ace of clubs. And he smiled. But
Iris looked at Guy, and she seemed very tall.

“Iris,” Hilary said gently, “we loved you too much as a child not to be
able to hate the woman who has gone out of her way to kill every memory
of that child....”

“That’s it, Iris,” Guy murmured, restrained, amiable. “You see, as a
child and as a girl you were very much in our hearts. Much more than any
other child and girl has ever been. I don’t know why. And in spite of
all things you’ve done we’ve always ... well, we’ve always kept one side
of us which was yours for the asking. I mean, Iris, we couldn’t believe
in you as a ... well, as a decent woman, but we’ve just stayed fond of
you. Even when we’ve had to hear your name being pitched about by vile
women and ghastly cads. Until now. But now....”

“A moment, Guy!” The clever, darting eyes, the neat figure, the
iron-grey hair, waving just a little. He smiled. He waved the black
ebony paper-knife at Iris as though she was a naughty girl. He knew Iris
inside-out, did Sir Maurice. She wasn’t all bad, not she. Iris looked at
him for the first time, and the clear untroubled look seemed now to be
fixed stonily. I wondered if she was afraid. The General spoke quickly,
brittle-bright: “Guy has just said, Iris, that we’ve known you all your
life. But there’s more than that, much more. That’s why I wanted you to
come here to-night. I wanted to show you us, Iris. This isn’t an
ordinary elopement, Napier’s and yours. It’s a stab in the back----”

“Maurice, am I stabbing you in the back by coming here?”

“You were always a strange, unfrightened girl, Iris. But the stab in the
back is made. It’s stabbing us, your people, in the back. Venice’s
people aren’t in this as we are. But that isn’t what I want to tell you.
Is it, Guy? And I’ve no intention of trying to beg Napier from you. I’m
not even yet old enough to beg favours from a woman. No, it seems
settled about you and Napier, as he told me this morning. And I tell
you, Iris, it wasn’t my son who spoke to me this morning. It was an
enchanted boy----”

“We are both of us enchanted, Maurice.” And Iris smiled. Her lips looked
very red, silken red.

“Very good, very good! Well, you go to-morrow. That’s fixed. But I just
wanted to show you us, Iris. I think you have forgotten us on your
travels. You are of us. I think you have forgotten that. And you are
stabbing us in the back. I’m not talking of Napier now as my son, my
only son. Am I, Guy? Hilary? I’ve taken great pride in the boy’s career,
I haven’t married again for his sake--but let all that go. I’m talking
of Napier now just as one of us here, the us that you belong to, of the
England that we stand for. We, Iris--you and us--we aren’t made only of
flesh-and-blood. There’s a little devil of slackness who stands waiting
for any of us who thinks he or she is only made of flesh-and-blood. We
are made of air, too--this air, Iris, that we are breathing now. We are
made of this air, you and us. We were born in it, our fathers and
mothers were born in it. Guy, Hilary, I, you, Napier, we were all of us
born within a hundred miles of this room, Guy at Mace, Hilary at
Magralt, Napier and I here at Sutton Marie, and you not two miles away
across the fields. We are of this soil, Iris, of this air, of this
England which is still our England. My God, we haven’t much left, but we
still have this. That is all I have to say, Iris. I just wanted to show
you us, because I thought you must have forgotten us. You have decided,
Iris, that you will break into our lives, and break up our lives. Why,
Iris? What sort of hell is your ambition in the next world? Tell me
that.”

“No, Maurice!” said Hilary sharply. “Keep to this world.”

Cold as stones were Iris’s eyes on Sir Maurice. She hated him beyond
words or looks. “Don’t let’s talk of hell, Maurice,” she whispered. “It
would shock even you if I were to tell you how much I know about it. I
am leaving hell behind at last. And do you know, Maurice, that hell
looks at me with your face? But I am leaving it behind now.”

“Listen, Iris. Just this one question.” Those clever, darting eyes were
curiously, strangely kind. I could not understand Sir Maurice. It was as
though he loved, feared, hated, indulged, Iris. He waved the black ebony
paper-knife at her. “Now I am a man of the world, Iris. Unlike Napier,
as you know. And what sort of a woman are you? Tell me that. I have
known many bad women. I have liked some. I have liked you, Iris. You
know that. But this isn’t badness. Damn it, girl, this is evil! There
aren’t any words in English to describe what we think of a woman who
comes wantonly between a man and his wife, a man and his career. I’m not
saying anything of your having come between Napier and me. He looked at
me this morning as though he hated me. But leave me out. You are
smashing a man’s career and you have stolen a man from his wife. What
sort of a woman are you, Iris? Tell us that.”

“Maurice!” And Iris smiled, and those very white teeth bit the moment
into two pieces with their smile and dropped the pieces into limbo. “You
are a baby sometimes, Maurice. You never dream of asking a woman ‘what
sort of a woman are you?’ so long as she keeps to the laws made by men.
But the first time you see a woman being a woman, you are surprised.”

“But what we don’t understand,” Guy murmured amiably, “is how you’ve
come by an entirely different set of ideas from ours. I mean ... well,
ideas about loyalty and treachery and things like that. You see, Iris,
we’ve suddenly found to-day that we simply don’t begin to understand
you. Isn’t that so, Hilary? I mean, we just don’t seem to think in the
same sickening language.”

“Exactly,” Sir Maurice rapped out, with the black ebony paper-knife.
“That’s it exactly, Iris. You see, this isn’t just your business and
Napier’s business. This concerns _us_. This stabs at the roots of our
life, Iris. But you and I don’t seem to think in the same language. I
think in English.”

Iris whispered, with eyes of stone: “Unfortunately, I think in English,
too....”

“Oh, come, Iris!” Guy murmured.

“If she didn’t think in English,” I said, “would she be here?”

Sir Maurice started. I was surprised, too.

“That’s true,” said he. “Quite true, boy. Yes.” And he smiled. I wished
he wouldn’t smile.

“In that case,” Guy murmured, “all I can say is, Iris, that yours must
be a very odd dialect of English. I mean, in yours there doesn’t seem to
be any distinction between words which--well, they mean rather a lot to
us. We’ve never even learned how to spell most of them, they’re so
inevitably part of our lives, or should be. I’m not sure to this day if
there’s an s in decency. One’s born knowing them....”

“Guy, I’ve had twelve years’ unhappiness. You talk to me of those words
we are born knowing. I have had twelve years’ unhappiness through not
being able to forget those words.”

“Unhappiness!” Sir Maurice rapped out. “Oh, come, child! You seem to
have done exactly as you pleased all these years. I’m not saying you
haven’t had bad luck--we’re all sorry about that. But if you have been
unhappy can you blame any one but yourself?”

Iris’s face was very stern as she looked at Sir Maurice. I could not
have thought that a beautiful woman could look so stern. And she made
not one gesture of womanhood. She could have made but one, and asserted
her right to live according to her womanhood. But that would have seemed
to her to be playing not fair. She must meet men on their own ground
always, always, and she must keep herself on their own ground without
showing the effort she made. She would advantage herself neither with
her womanhood nor her beauty. She seemed to look for a long time at Sir
Maurice. Her lips were silken red, and I thought just then that to kiss
them would be to kiss the infinite.

“Yes, Maurice. I can put the blame on three words.”

The General threw the paper-knife on to a small table, where it fell
with a crash. “Weakness? Wickedness? Wantonness?”

“The three words I was thinking of make Sir Maurice Harpenden.”

Then, curiously, Sir Maurice darted a look at Hilary, as though to see
how he stood with Hilary. Hilary was white. He said: “I’ve told you,
Maurice, that you’re not free from blame. You’ve been too damned
imperious with these children.”

“All this,” Guy murmured, “has got me beat, I’m afraid.”

“It hasn’t got you beat at all, Guy,” snapped Hilary. White he was.
“Maurice, years ago, didn’t realise that in our time we are not our
children’s masters. Their ideas are not ours, their ambitions are not
ours. And there’s no reason why they should be, since ours have sent all
Europe to the devil.”

Then Iris’s voice slashed the room like a sharp knife: “Maurice, did you
understand what I said? I am here to-night that you should understand
what you have done.”

“My dear Iris!” said Sir Maurice, again picking up the paper-knife. One
saw why he had been so successful a soldier. He could evade any issue.
“Boy and girl love!” he said helplessly to Guy. He looked at me. “Boy
and girl love!” he said helplessly.

“You mustn’t despise it, Maurice,” Iris suddenly smiled, and I had a
fancy that her smile was one of protecting a child from a man’s
good-sense. “It won’t do to despise that boy and girl love, Maurice. It
has lasted nearly all my life so far. And it will last me until I die.”
She looked at Guy, and as soon as she looked away from the General the
clear, untroubled, boyish look came back into those enormous eyes.
“Napier and I were in love at eighteen, Guy. Napier and I have always
been in love. But Sir Maurice had other ideas for Napier, and this is
the result of them. I am sorry, Guy, but I am also human.”

“Love!” rapped out Sir Maurice. He was not smiling now.

“Love!” Iris whispered. “Love, Maurice! You daren’t look into my eyes
and say you doubt my love for Napier. You daren’t say that my love is
not the only thing in this room that is made in the image of God. You
talk to me of your England. I despise your England, I despise the us
that is us. We are shams with patrician faces and peasant minds. We are
built of lies, Maurice, and we toil for the rewards of worms. You would
have Napier toil for a worm’s reward, you are sorry I have broken
Napier’s career in the Foreign Office. Maurice, I am glad. To you, it
seems a worthy thing for a good man to make a success in the nasty arena
of national strifes and international jealousies. To me, a world which
thinks of itself in terms of puny, squalid, bickering little nations and
not as one glorious field for the crusade of mankind is a world in which
to succeed is the highest indignity that can befall a good man, it is a
world in which good men are shut up like gods in a lavatory. Maurice,
there are better things, nobler things, cleaner things, than can be
found in any career that will glorify a man’s name or nationality. You
thought to bully me with our traditions. You are right, they are mine as
well as yours. May God forgive you the sins committed in their name! And
may He forgive me for ever having believed in them....”

With one darting stride Sir Maurice had his hand sharply on her
shoulder, that leather shoulder. And at that moment, when she had seemed
at her strongest, her eyes seemed to flutter from his unsmiling face.
Her eyes were flooded with gentleness, and they seemed to flutter, to
want to fly from that stern, handsome face. Yet Sir Maurice’s eyes were
curiously kind. Perhaps that was why she had suddenly wilted. She hated
him so, and his eyes were curiously kind. That was a clever man, Sir
Maurice. Then, in a second, with an effort she superbly hid from our
eyes, she was calm again. Always she must meet a man on his own ground.

“Iris,” Sir Maurice said quietly, his hand on her shoulder, “I am sorry
I caused you unhappiness when you were a child. I admit I wanted a
different alliance for Napier. And you must admit, child, that the March
blood is not a very encouraging prospect for a father. But I am
sincerely sorry I was unkind to you. But you must see, Iris, that yours
was an unusual case. You were mature at eighteen, but I could realise
neither that nor the depth of your feelings. Really, child, you mustn’t
blame me too much. We can’t always tell when a boy and girl friendship
is serious----”

“Maurice, why do you lie? I didn’t think you would lie to-night. You
knew very well that it was serious. That was why you made Napier promise
never to see me again. And your son kept his promise.”

“But why didn’t you come and tell me about it frankly, Iris? I had other
plans for Napier, yes, but apart from that I was always your friend. You
should have come and told me about it----”

“Oh, I was proud then! As I am not proud now....”

“What!” We started at the odd snap in Guy’s voice. “What, Iris?” And he
laughed, desperately, helplessly. Guy! “Iris, that’s the first lie I’ve
ever known pass your lips. Why, you’re as proud as an archangel!” We
stared at him, somehow staggered by him, as he suddenly strode forward,
the fair, slender giant. “Just a moment, Maurice,” said he, and bent
down and kissed Iris’s cheek.

“Oh!”

This moment I can hear that despairing cry. “Oh!”

And then she tried to catch back her cry, she sobbed: “Judas!”

Guy had caught her as she started back from him like a frightened
animal. “Judas nothing,” he murmured. Her face streamed with tears. Guy
held her, his eyes strangely sad. “Judas nothing, my Iris,” he murmured.
“You’ve won, girl. Go away and play at your lovely game of love. You’ve
got me again, as you had when you were a child. I must say I like some
one who really loves and really hates. I’m proud of you, Iris.”

Somehow, somehow, as Guy held her, Iris’s eyes looked through the mist
towards me, and I moved my lips to make two words: Saint George.
Somewhere in the mist she smiled....

She whispered: “Unfair, unfair, unfair! Guy, to kiss me like that,
sweet, forgiving Guy! Oh, unfair, unfair, unfair! And I was so sure I
wouldn’t cry to-night....”

Sir Maurice was fidgeting with the black ebony paper-knife. Hilary said
“hm” and blew his nose. It was very funny now that it was Sir Maurice
who seemed to be alone. I was glad. Iris had at last been forced to
retreat from that proud battlefield on which she met men on their own
ground. She had made her one gesture of womanhood; and now it was Sir
Maurice who stood alone. Clever Guy. He was looking towards the General,
smiling....

“Maurice,” he smiled, “the girl’s right. You were rather a sickening
ass....”

“My dear Guy,” said the General with a tremendous helplessness; and he
smiled. “How on earth was I to know then that a boy and gir----”

“Oh, phut!” Guy smiled like a boy. “You don’t catch me interfering with
any of my boy’s friendships, I can tell you. Not that I’ve ever really
thought about these things before. One just goes driving along never
giving these things a thought until one day we all go off the deep end
just because we never have given them a thought. I fancy Hilary’s right
about this father and child business. I mean, people have been having
sons, I suppose, since the year one, and the relation between them is
still a mess. In this century, for instance, all we people have been
bucking no end about being brotherly with our sons, as though being a
fat-headed brother was any good if you don’t understand what the cub is
driving at. I just thought of that this very moment. For instance, my
boy told me the other day that Kipling wrote true-blue miracles
calculated to increase the blood-pressure in men who were too old to
fight. I gave him a thrashing with the gloves for his infernal cheek,
especially as he must have got it out of some book, for the boy hasn’t
what you could call a brain, which is just as well, for it will keep him
from going over to Labour. But, after all, our cubs can’t make more of a
mess of everything than we and our fathers have done. That’s the point
to hang on to.”

“Good God, man!” snapped Hilary. “I’ve been saying that to you for
twenty years, and you’ve----”

“That’s right, Hilary,” Guy grinned. “But you’ve got a way of saying
things....”

Iris was looking from one to the other of us. It was as though she was
in a dream, looking at faces in a dream. Soft she was now, soft and
white and small. And her eyes were clouds of blue mist. She stared at
Sir Maurice, who stood fidgeting with the paper-knife. “Maurice,” she
whispered, “good-bye.”

Sharply he looked up from the paper-knife. He flipped the paper-knife on
to the card-table. Then I saw that Sir Maurice hated his ancient enemy.

“Good-bye, Iris,” he said. “But you must not expect me to wish you
happiness. You have taken from me my only son.”

“Maurice,” she said desperately, “isn’t that special pleading? Haven’t
you any pity, any understanding, of what I have been through?”

“Understanding! Yes, I have understanding, Iris. But I can’t let it
stretch across the wide gulf that should separate you from my son.”

“But you made the gulf, Maurice! You, you!” She seemed passionately to
want his understanding now!

“I!” cried Sir Maurice. “Good God, woman, I merely parted a boy and a
girl. But you could have found each other again--if you hadn’t been you!
_I_ made the gulf! Iris, did I murder Boy Fenwick!”

“Maurice, you take that back!”

“Hilary, never mind.” It was a faint, husky whisper. “Just don’t mind,
Hilary.” She was staring at Sir Maurice as at a snake. She was calm.
“Did you say murder, Sir Maurice? Murder?”

Sir Maurice made the most helpless gesture. He looked very old. “I
apologise, Iris, I apologise! I take it back completely. I was carried
away. I apologise, child. Of course, murder was much too strong----”

“Too strong?” Guy echoed softly. “If you ask me, sir, it was so damned
strong that it’s a wonder to me that it hasn’t blown us all out of the
house.”

“I have apologised, Guy!” snapped Sir Maurice.

Iris was looking at me. She seemed lost in some thought, she was very
still. Her lips said: “Dear, take me away.”

Sir Maurice darted for his paper-knife, fumbled among the cards for it,
got it, rapped out: “Just one moment, Iris. I didn’t mean to say that.
You must see that. I apologise sincerely.”

“I cannot hear your apology, Maurice. Because of that gulf.”

“I never thought of saying that,” Guy murmured. “Damn!”

“Just a moment, just a moment!” the General waved the paper-knife
fretfully. “Ever since Napier came to see me this morning I have been
thinking of these things. I saw Venice this afternoon. She is mad, I
think, or enchanted. She believes in your love for Napier. I can only
see the helpless ruin you have made of my son. And you say you love him!
Let’s forget if we can all the other men you have ‘loved.’ Just take
this one fact. Not two years after parting from Napier for good, which
you say broke your heart, you marry Boy Fenwick. And when Boy Fenwick
died you yourself said he had died ‘for purity.’ What did that mean if
not that even before you married him ... you yourself, I say, said that
he had died ‘for purity’!”

“For hell, sir! That was why Boy Fenwick died!”

“Napier!” There was a long, long silence. “Napier!” Iris whispered
frantically. “My darling, why are you here!”

“To get you....” Napier’s voice trembled pitifully. He controlled it by
whispering. “To get you from these ... men!”

“Steady, Naps!” Guy murmured. “We began the evening by bucking about
being civilised.”

Again, as in the obscure silence of the Paris night, the white face, the
lost eyes ... facing us from the middle French-window.

“Napier!” Iris pleaded. She seemed to be pleading against something
which only she could see in those two dark ruins of eyes. And they made
ruins of all, those eyes, but saw only one of us. And behind his
shoulder, in the garden, pale, wide-eyed, steady as a judgment, stood
Venice....

“Good God, man!” Sir Maurice rapped out. “Why bring Venice into this!”

“He didn’t. I came.” And Venice smiled in a sort of way.

Napier said in a scarcely audible voice: “Let Venice alone. I think she
is my only friend.” As he stepped into the room Iris made a step towards
him, two, three. Her eyes were dilated, beseeching. But never once,
since the shock of his first words had turned us to the windows, had he
taken his eyes from his father. The dark, fevered, lost eyes. He was
passing Iris. She snatched at his arm, pulled at him. “Napier, don’t,
don’t. Napier, please, my sweet! Venice, for pity’s sake stop him. You
don’t _know_ what he’s going to say!”

The thin white fingers of the so naked right hand were buried round the
black-covered arm, holding him in his stride; but still Napier looked
only at his father. His face was so white that we all looked red and
swollen. But Sir Maurice was not put out by his son’s fixed stare. He
had his black ebony paper-knife.

“Well, Naps? What does this mean?”

Iris cried: “Napier!” Then she turned passionately to Venice. “Don’t you
see, Venice! He doesn’t know what he’s saying!”

“It means, sir,” Napier said quietly, “that if you weren’t my father I
would call you a cad.”

“Don’t!” Hilary snapped. “Hm. Run away now, all of you. Together or
separate. Just run away.”

Iris pulled at Napier’s arm. He did not see her. He said very quietly,
his voice imperceptibly trembling: “Venice and I called after dinner at
Montpellier Square. Venice wished to say good-bye to Iris. What is
between Iris and Venice is their business. They make me feel a lout,
they make you look like.... We found Mrs. Oden upset. She said Iris had
come here, and....” His voice broke, and he passed a hand over his mouth
as though to steady it. He scowled.

Venice, still by the window, was wearing a leathercoat like Iris’s, but
it looked much newer and lighter. She had her hands dug deep into the
pockets. Iris cried: “Venice, for pity’s sake help me make Napier come
away! Oh, you don’t understand! He’s no idea what he’s saying!”

For the first time Napier took his eyes from his father. His mouth
twitched funnily, and he scowled. “Yes, I have, Iris. But I want to
clear up this business once and for all. It’s gone on long enough,
this--this Boy Fenwick business. What?”

“But, Napier, you promised!”

He scowled. “I don’t care, Iris. I’m awfully tired of all these
pretences. It can’t ... it can’t go on, this slandering of you. It
can’t. I can’t bear it. And the first thing I hear as I come into this
room is my father chucking that slime at you---”

“Napier, don’t you see that it’s me you hurt, not them! You hurt me
deeply, Napier. Listen to me, my dear, listen!”

But Napier seemed able to hear nothing, to see no one but his father.
Again he put his hand to his mouth to stop it twitching. Venice, a flame
in a leather jacket, suddenly threw an arm round Iris. “Darling,
darling, _darling_! How dared you come here! But how dared you! Oh!” she
stamped her foot, “these beasts of men, these beasts, beasts!”

“Venice,” Guy murmured, “take these two children of yours away at once.
Go along now.”

Napier started at Guy’s voice. He had admired and worshipped Guy always.
Guy smiled faintly, helplessly, was about to say something when Napier
said bitterly: “Guy, I know it wasn’t your idea to bring Iris down here
and throw that mud at her. I know that----”

“It was mine,” Sir Maurice rapped out with the paper-knife. “And it’s
over now. You may go, Napier. I am asking you to go, boy! And you, Iris
March. You and I, Napier, must part from to-night. For some time, at
least. You will prefer that, too. You have every right to be angry with
me, according to your lights. I gambled--for your future, boy--and I
have lost. I am not sorry to have tried. I am sorry to have lost. Now
you may be as angry as you like--but go!”

Napier’s voice trembled: “Before I go, sir, I’d like to say----”

“Naps, enough of this!” Guy snapped. “The more we talk the worse we make
it. Go along, for God’s sake.”

Napier shouted: “I will not go!”

And in the deep, startled silence that must always follow a shout in an
English house, he said, livid quiet, to his father: “I’ve ceased to be a
boy of eighteen, sir. And I’ve ceased to want to be any of the things
you seem to admire. This last year it has seemed to me that not one of
the things that have made my life as you directed it have any reality.
You’ve only got to think once and the whole ghastly pretence of a life
like mine drops to the ground. And I’ve been trying lately to understand
the point of view that makes men admirable in your eyes, sir--and I
can’t get near it. It seems to mean sacrificing all the things that are
worth while to all the things that aren’t worth while. You sacrificed
Iris for what you call my future, my career. Weigh Iris on one side and
on the other my future, my career, now that I am thirty! You sacrificed
my happiness to the ghastly vanity of making our name something in this
world. You call that ‘working for my future,’ sir. And I call it the
cruel sort of humbug which has dragged God knows how many decent people
into a beastly, futile unhappiness. Here I am at thirty, a nothing
without even the excuse of being a happy nothing, a nothing liked by
other nothings and successful among other nothings, a nothing wrapped
round by the putrefying little rules of the gentlemanly tradition. And,
my God, they are putrefying, and I bless the England that has at last
found us out. And if they hadn’t been putrefying, sir, and if we hadn’t
been going rotten with them, you couldn’t have taken advantage of the
fact that Iris never funked anything in her life to bring her down here
and drag her through the slime----”

“Napier, you must allow me at least the quality of patience. My one
desire, boy, was to protect your happiness. I do not take what you say
in the least seriously, for it isn’t you speaking but Iris with your
voice. You are enchanted----”

“And I should jolly well think he was enchanted!” cried the boy that was
Venice, her arm round Iris. A warrior was Venice then, and her leather
jacket like a shining breastplate. “And I’m enchanted, too--and if you
really want to know what’s the matter with the whole lot of you, you’re
all enchanted--by the love of Napier and Iris. I’d stuff all our
marriage-laws down a drain-pipe rather than keep them apart for another
minute. And I think you must be mad and bad not to see the loveliness of
a love like Iris’s--and after all this time she’s beaten you all in the
end, and I’m so glad, so glad, so glad!”

“Maurice,” said Hilary gravely, “you are getting more like God every
moment. You’re in a minority of one.”

Napier stood in the middle of the room, looking from one to the other
of us, scowling, seeing no one, hearing nothing. He was a man lost in an
obsession, trying to find his way out. His back was to Iris. Some great
man, Balzac, maybe, has said that women do not love with their eyes, but
there was a blinding love in her eyes, and her lips trembled, tried to
smile at the lost thing that Napier was. Only she seemed to know the
obsession in which Napier wandered, and she just managed to say: “Come,
Napier. Come....”

Napier turned to her vaguely, seemed about to go with her, then pulled
himself round to his father again: “Before I go, sir, I’d like to tell
you--I’d like to say that--that it was a foul thing to do to throw
Fenwick at Iris----”

“Napier,” Sir Maurice said quietly, “I have apologised for that----”

“But have you apologised for us all, sir?” Napier seemed at last to
awake from his obsession. He looked happy at that moment. “Have you
apologised for the opinion we’ve all had of Iris for ten years? Because
all these slanders about her go back to----”

“Napier, my Napier, you please mustn’t!”

“Iris, I must put this right! You’ve never had enough respect for
yourself----”

“But I have now, dear! Let me ... keep it....”

Napier seemed to appeal to Guy. There was a curious understanding in
Guy’s look. He said: “Go on, Naps, let’s have it all now. What’s this
about Fenwick?”

“Guy, don’t encourage him!” Iris cried passionately. Venice held her
tight. Iris looked at me once just then, and I think that is the last
time she ever saw me.

Napier seemed to appeal to Guy: “Iris has always put her friends before
herself. And the only time in her life she ever told a lie we all rushed
to believe her. And that’s why Iris and I never saw each other after
Fenwick’s death until three nights before I married Venice. I wasn’t to
know then that I was marrying an angel, and so I couldn’t tell her what
had happened to me and Iris. Iris told me about Fenwick that night. I
made her. You see, until then I’d never wanted to see her, because the
Iris that Boy had killed himself for wasn’t the Iris I’d loved as a
boy----”

“But she is now, Napier,” Iris whispered bitterly. “Why can’t you let
be, why can’t you!”

“Because,” Napier flashed, “I love you, and I’m damn well going to have
these people respect you as I do.... That lie Iris spread about the
reason for Boy’s death was because she didn’t care what happened to her.
She just didn’t care. But she wanted people to think as well of Boy as
people can of a suicide. She wanted Gerald to keep his little tin-god
hero. And she had it all her own way because the doctor at the hotel in
Deauville was a friend of hers and let nothing out. She just didn’t care
what people thought of her, and so she said that Boy had died ‘for
purity.’ That might mean anything, and so of course we all took it to
mean the worst thing as regards Iris. Oh, she knew we would. Well, so
Boy did die ‘for purity.’ He was mad with love for Iris, and from the
moment she had to give me up he pestered her to marry him. Then one day
she surprised him by saying she would. I suppose she surprised him by
giving way in the end, and instead of the cad saying he couldn’t, he
took her while he had the chance. He----”

“Napier!”

“He had syphilis when he married her, and went mad when he realised what
he had done. That’s all. There’s your Boy Fenwick. There’s Iris, that’s
Iris!” He turned to her blindly. She was staring, so thoughtfully, at
the carpet. “Come, Iris. We’ll go now. And we’ll begin again from the
time you and I said good-bye under Harrod’s.”

“You’ve taken from me,” the husky voice whispered to the carpet, “the
only gracious thing I ever did in my life. Yes, let’s go.”

They were going in silence. Iris had one foot in the garden when across
the silence darted the neat figure of Sir Maurice. He touched her
shoulder. “Iris,” he said. She looked round at him with huge,
sleep-walking eyes.

“Iris,” Sir Maurice said. He was holding out his hand.

“I can’t,” she whispered. “I’ve hated you so bitterly, so long. I can’t.
Maurice, please don’t ask me.”

“I do ask you, Iris. I beg it from you. You are good.”

Iris’s eyes were as though transfixed over the taut old gentleman’s
shoulder. Iris’s eyes were on Venice. Napier had touched Venice’s hand,
and somehow as he had made to kiss her cheek she had started back
frantically ... and had instantly smiled ... brightly. Iris’s eyes
seemed to dilate. Then she took Sir Maurice’s hand. “Thank you,
Maurice. But it is Venice who is good. Venice is good. Good-bye.”

They went silently. For a second the green hat flamed in the mist of the
light that fell on the lawn, and then the green hat was gone. I stared
out into the garden.

I remember a “hm” just at the very moment when behind me there was a
thud of some one falling, and Guy’s murmur: “Hand me that brandy,
Maurice.”

Venice sat very erect in a great leather armchair. Her eyes were closed.

Sir Maurice darted about. He waved at me that black ebony paper-knife.
He smiled that ancient smile. “Boy, we shouldn’t make hard-and-fast
rules for any one but ourselves. And not even for ourselves. Leads to no
good....”

“She’s all right,” Guy murmured to Hilary. De Travest was one of those
men who always know how to deal with any physical emergency. He knew
tricks....

“Poor child, poor child!” sighed Sir Maurice.

“She’s all right now,” said Hilary. He was very white and young-looking,
Hilary. Oh, the hm’s that dropped from Hilary that night!

It was Guy’s face that Venice saw when she opened her eyes. Suddenly,
she was crimson.

“Your first words should be,” Guy smiled, “‘Where am I?’ I may or may
not tell you.”

“Guy, where am I?” She was crimson, like a child found out.

“With your friends, Venice, who love you. And Napier has gone.

“But he hasn’t!” she screamed, and caught her scream to her mouth with
the palm of her hand. We followed her terrified eyes to see Napier where
we had first seen him that night. He stared at Venice. And just at that
moment the silence was shattered by the roar of the Hispano. That
shattering roar held us all still, bewildered. From beneath the trees of
Sutton Marle it swept on us like the roar of a thousand rifles.

“That car’s gone mad!” rose to my lips.

I saw Venice bite the back of her hand, staring at Napier. The roar of
the car had held him at the open window. As he came in Guy spoke
savagely. “Napier, what the hell does this mean? Can’t you see what
you’re doing to Venice?”

Napier said wearily, and he tried to smile, his eyes on Venice: “All
right, Guy. I thought Venice was my friend. I was wrong----”

“Naps,” rapped out Sir Maurice, “what does this mean!”

As Napier approached near to Venice she jumped up from her chair and
started away from him.

“Napier, I don’t understand!” she tried not to sob. “Why have you come
back? Napier!”

He said wearily: “Why didn’t you tell me, Venice? I can’t understand.
God knows I’ve no opinion of myself left, but I’m not such a pitiful
blackguard as----”

“But what is it, Naps!” And she bit the back of her hand. “I don’t know
what you’re talking about! Why are you looking at me like that?” “You
told Iris, but not me, in case it might interfere with my happiness! My
God, Venice, what do you think I am, not to have told me! Do you think
I can leave you when you are with a child of mine! Iris said she had
promised you not to tell me, but she broke down at the last moment----”

“But it’s a lie!” Venice screamed. “It’s a bloody lie! I never told her
anything! It’s not true! Oh, God, it’s not true!”

What was said then, what was done, how they looked, I can’t remember. I
remember only that as Venice sobbed the roar of the car seemed to
lessen. The stork had passed from under the trees of Sutton Marle. I
think Napier was holding Venice, she was sobbing as though with a
breaking heart. “She’s sent you back,” she sobbed. “The beast, the
beast! She’s sent you back to show she loved you more than I do....”

Sir Maurice darted across at me, rapped me on the shoulder with the
paper-knife.

“Boy, what was that you said about that car going mad?”

I stared at him. I hadn’t the faintest idea what I had meant. The
distant roar still filled the room like a menace. “I don’t know,” I
said. “Sounds mad....”

“Come along,” the old gentleman rapped out, and darted through the
window. I have a confused picture of Guy towering over Napier and Venice
with a brimming glass in his hand, of Hilary staring whitely after us.
Like a young lover, I see Hilary at that moment. I caught the General up
as he was starting-off Guy’s car.

“After her, boy. After her. Feel sick, her going like that. Feel sick.”

“Can’t catch her in this car, sir.”

“We’ll see. Try, anyway. Must catch her. Must beg her forgiveness.” He
looked at me as the car started off. He was smiling. Those clever
darting eyes were wet. Then Hilary, hatless like ourselves, jumped on to
the footboard and into the back.

“What’s this, Maurice?”

“After her, man. Iris suddenly thrown her hand in. Listen to that hell’s
own racket!”

Sir Maurice rushed that ancient Rolls breakneck up the winding drive.
From the distance came that menacing roar. “Can do seventy-six if you
like,” I heard the husky whisper above the roar, I saw the dancing tawny
curls through the darkness, boy’s head, curly head, white and
tiger-tawny....

“Can’t catch her in this,” I cried again.

Hilary was leaning forward from behind, his chin by my shoulder. He
whispered through the rushing air: “Afraid of her happiness in the end.
You beat her, Maurice. You beat her, you and your mouldy old England.
And your son wasn’t worthy of her love. Good God, he cared whether we
respected her or not! She wasn’t enough for him as she was. Maurice,
it’s on your head, all this. She’ll be in despair. You’ve got to catch
her.”

We swept headlong round a corner. We were on the crown of the several
small slopes that I remembered ascending from Harrod’s to Sutton Marle.

“There!” yelled Sir Maurice. And he laughed like an excited boy. “We’ll
catch her yet.”

Far down the slope, winding, killing the darkness, rushed the lights of
the Hispano. Sir Maurice kept his thumb on the button of the
electric-horn, and we drove headlong down that slope with a wild cry of
warning to Iris.

“She can’t hear!” I yelled.

“Go on, let her know we’re here!” yelled Hilary.

The General’s silver hair waved frantically in the wind. He was driving
like a madman. He was smiling. The two great lights ahead lit the
countryside. Then they seemed to shorten, and Harrod’s stood like a
pillar of light against the darkness. The silver leaves, the giant trunk
... in the lights of Iris’s car. The stork screamed hoarsely, once,
twice, thrice....

“Iris!” Hilary sobbed. “Stop her, man! Stop her! Not that----”

“Iris, not that!” Sir Maurice whispered. “Child, not that!”

I was blind, sick. There was a tearing crash, a tongue of fire among the
leaves of Harrod’s. Our car had stopped. “Iris!” Sir Maurice whispered.
“Iris!” Once again the great tree was lit by a shivering light, then
from the darkness there came a grinding, moaning noise as of a great
beast in pain. I stood beside Sir Maurice on the road. At the angle at
which we had stopped our lights did not fall on the throbbing wreck. He
was staring into the darkness.

“But that death!” Hilary stammered. “That death!”

My foot touched something on the grass beside the road, and I picked up
the green hat.

Sir Maurice said hoarsely: ‘Chose the only way to make it look like an
accident to those two children....”

“Here’s her hat.” I muttered, and as Sir Maurice turned to it his face
was puckered like a child’s.

Suddenly the moaning of the wrecked car ceased, and in the silence
Hilary walked into the darkness about the great tree.


                     THE END OF THE ROMANCE CALLED
                            _The Green Hat_


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

and an absymal bitterness=> and an abysmal bitterness {pg 73}

l’aristocratic internationale=> l’aristocratie internationale {pg 152}

fissues of splintered wood=> fissures of splintered wood {pg 285}






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN HAT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
