The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Green hat
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Green hat


Author: Michael Arlen

Release date: October 19, 2023 [eBook #71913]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: George H. Doran Company, 1924

Credits: Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN HAT ***




                            _The Green Hat_

                             MICHAEL ARLEN




                          _By_ MICHAEL ARLEN


                         _These Charming People_
                         _The Green Hat_
                         _“Piracy”_
                         _The Romantic Lady_
                         _The London Venture_




                            _The Green Hat_


                                 _by_

                            _Michael Arlen_

                            [Illustration]

                              _NEW YORK_
                        GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

                           _Copyright, 1924,
                      By George H. Doran Company_

                            [Illustration]

                             THE GREEN HAT

                                 --B--

                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                                 _To_

                        F. M. ATKINSON, Esquire




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE
  _One_: THE GREEN HAT                                                11
  _Two_: THE CAVALIER OF LOW CREATURES                                60
_Three_: FOR PURITY!                                                  81
 _Four_: APHRODITE                                                   114
 _Five_: THE DARK LETTER                                             151
  _Six_: THE RED LIGHTS                                              173
_Seven_: FOR VENICE!                                                 210
_Eight_: PIQURE DU CŒUR                                              237
 _Nine_: TALKING OF HATS                                             253
  _Ten_: THE FALL OF THE EMERALD                                     270
_The Last Chapter_: ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND! 300




THE GREEN HAT




CHAPTER ONE: THE GREEN HAT


I

It has occurred to the writer to call this unimportant history The Green
Hat because a green hat was the first thing about her that he saw: as
also it was, in a way, the last thing about her that he saw. It was
bright green, of a sort of felt, and bravely worn: being, no doubt, one
of those that women who have many hats affect _pour le sport_.

I saw it for the first time (writes the Author) on the eve of my removal
from one residence in London to another; although when I say residence I
mean that I was, by the grace of God and at the impulse of my own
temerity, removing to somewhat more habitable premises nearby from two
rooms and a bathroom above a mean lane in a place called Shepherd’s
Market. Not that our lane hadn’t attractions of its own to offer. Our
lane was one in which many improbable things were wont to happen, but it
somehow seemed inevitable that such things should happen there. But
maybe I had better select a few of these things, that you may know the
sort of lane ours was. I have seen men arrested there, and I have seen
a heavy constable worsted in a fight with a little Jew pickpocket, who
was for some time responsible for a rag-shop in our lane. I have seen
two butlers fighting in our lane. I have seen a very old nobleman woo a
flower-girl in our lane, but whether or not she ever favoured his suit
our lane had no means of telling. One night I fell over the body of a
woman lying in the blood of a broken head, and in our lane by night
policemen solace themselves by smoking cigarettes into the crowns of
their helmets, while cats, I must tell you, will never cease to sport
together all about it.

But it was by day that our lane attained to any real interest for a
student of such things, for then it was sacred to the activities of a
hearty-looking man in a brown bowler-hat, who with one hand would write
interminably in a small book, while with the other he dealt with passing
men in slips of paper known to the law as “betting-slips.” As partner to
the hearty-looking man--we are, I venture to say, already embarked on
our tale, for these gentlemen will make a faint devil’s chorus for more
spacious happenings--was a tall, wizened man who wore a check cap and
had hair growing out of his ears. This man would stand at one end of the
lane and now and then say, “Oi!” When he had said “Oi!” he would light a
cigarette, while the hearty-looking man would run heavily round our end
of the lane, for “Oi!” meant that the law was after him. When the law
had gone he would come back wiping his mouth, and jokes were exchanged
with the butcher and the fishmonger; but when the law really wanted
him, say twice a year, a posse of policemen would simultaneously rush
both ends of our lane, and the hearty-looking man was mulcted in a fine
not exceeding so much and was back again the next morning within a yard
of my door. Among his most persistent admirers was a little bent old man
with blood-shot eyes and a twitching mouth, who was a window-cleaner
without a Union, which meant that he would clean a window for threepence
and want no tip. He liked me, and used to give me racing information,
but I never won anything.

Now the first thing to do is to clear the ground as quickly as possible
for the coming of the green hat, for Mr. H. G. Wells says that there is
no money to be made out of any book that cannot bring a woman in within
the first few thousand words. But in setting the scene in Shepherd’s
Market we have evaded the necessity for any “writing-up” of atmosphere,
for that place has an atmosphere quite impossible to convey in a book,
unless, of course, you were to take the book to Shepherd’s Market and
leave it in our lane for a few days in nice warm weather. Shepherd’s
Market is, in fine, a collection of lively odours bounded on the north
side by Curzon Street, on the south by Piccadilly, on the west by
Hertford Street, and on the east by Half-Moon Street; and rejoices,
therefore, in the polite direction of Mayfair, as you will see printed
on the notepaper of any of its residents. A flower-shop which was opened
in our lane lived for only six months, and that in spite of the gardenia
gallantly affected by the old nobleman from Curzon Street every day. I,
after having lived there for six years, was (by the grace of God)
leaving on the morrow.

It is late, after midnight, when the tale begins.

I had been that evening to a party; for that is now the name that folks
give to a dance,--I am not sure why. In America, I believe, one doesn’t
even give a party, one just throws a party, but as to this party I am
telling of, it had, with that infallible sense of direction peculiar to
parties, whether given or thrown, taken a man by the nerves at the back
of his head and had hurled him into a deep pit. And it was as one
encompassed by that pit, deep as the playground of the seven devils,
dark as the very dungeons of gaiety, that I found myself back in my flat
above the mean lane. It would be the last night I would ever spend in
that flat, and I was so glad. The bookshelves had already been taken
away, and books littered the floor, books and pictures and what-nots
crowded the gate-leg table, while the ottoman with its soiled Chinese
yellow cover was a shambles of whatever you will find in a bachelor’s
flat if you begin to clean out the drawers. The bedroom, however, was
still ordered for human habitation.

Now I had no sooner cast my hat on the bed than the bell rang. It was
one of those infernal things you pull at, so that they may go on
clanging for ever, and as it clanged I wondered, I am afraid
ungraciously, who it could be. Could it, I wondered, be any one for
Gerald March, who lived in the flat above mine? But no one, I told
myself, has called on Gerald March within the memory of man, for that
man discourages callers, that man knows how to discourage callers.

I had no hope in pretending not to be at home, for my lights were plain
to see from our lane. And in my mind’s eye I saw the hearty face of the
acquaintance at the door, and with my mind’s ear I heard the hearty
greeting that dropped from his parasitical and thirsty lips. He had seen
my light, that man, as he went his way home from some party even more
pestilential than the one which had sent me home stricken; and he would
fain drink a glass with me, after the fashion of pests of the night,
that are hearty with the weary and thirsty with the unwary.

I could, however, always order my privacy without seeming too unfriendly
by looking down from my bedroom window, for whereas the windows of my
sitting-room faced the public-bar of The Leather Butler and an angle of
the offices of the Duke of Marlborough’s fine house, from my bedroom
window I had a clear prospect of our lane. Of pests, however, there was
neither sight nor sign; nor of cats, nor of men, nor of any low and
usual thing; only, under the lamp at the Sheep Street end of our lane, a
long, low, yellow car which shone like a battle-chariot. It was empty.

Now I am of those who are affected by motor-cars: their lines thrill me,
the harmony of their colour touches me, a gallant device wins my earnest
admiration so that, walking along Piccadilly, I will distress my mind by
being a partisan of this one, a despiser of that one. Nor am I to be won
by any cheap thing, no matter how brave-seeming it may be to the eye,
how admirable in endurance; but I am to be won only by the simple
lines, the severe and menacing aspect, of the aces among motor-cars; for
economy hath charms, but not to the eye. This car charmed the eye. Like
a huge yellow insect that had dropped to earth from a butterfly
civilisation, this car, gallant and suave, rested in the lowly silence
of the Shepherd’s Market night. Open as a yacht, it wore a great shining
bonnet, and flying over the crest of this great bonnet, as though in
proud flight over the heads of scores of phantom horses, was that silver
stork by which the gentle may be pleased to know that they have just
escaped death beneath the wheels of a Hispano-Suiza car, as supplied to
His Most Catholic Majesty.

Downwards to my door I looked, and there was a green hat before my door.
The light from the one lamp in Sheep Street fell about it, and that was
how I saw that it was a green hat, of a sort of felt, and bravely worn:
being, no doubt, one of those that women who have many hats affect _pour
le sport_.

II

“Do you know if Mr. March is in?” asked the voice of the green hat. But
I could not see her face for the shadow of the brim, for it was a
piratical brim, such as might very possibly defy the burning suns of El
Dorado.

I said I was not sure. I was very surprised--a caller for Gerald March!
“If we look up,” I said, “we can see by his lights if he is in.” And I
stepped out into the lane, and the green hat and I stared up at the
topmost windows of the grubby little house.

“There’s no light _there_,” she said. “I suppose the light below is
yours....”

“There is,” I said, “but it’s very faint. He’s in all right.”

Still she looked up, thoughtfully. She was tall, not very tall, but as
tall as becomes a woman. Her hair, in the shadow of her hat, may have
been any colour, but I dared swear that there was a tawny whisper to it.
And it seemed to dance, from beneath her hat, a very formal dance on her
cheeks. One had, with her, a sense of the conventions; and that she had
just been playing six sets of tennis.

“If I look surprised,” I said, “that is because you are the first caller
Gerald March has ever had.”

She seemed to smile, faintly, as one might in the way of politeness.
Otherwise she did not seem to be given to smiling.

“He’s my brother,” she said, as though explaining herself, the hour,
everything. “It’s very nice of you to have opened the door....”

I was listening, oh, intently! One had to, to make out what she was
saying. Then the voice suddenly expired and one was left standing there,
listening to nothing, unprepared to say anything. It was, you can see,
rather silly; but one got used to it.

“Oh,” I said, “Gerald wouldn’t open a door! He never opens doors....”

She looked vaguely about our lane. I was proud of our lane at that
moment, for it set off the colour of her hat so well. There was no
doubt but that she was tired. Seven sets, possibly. Her eyes seemed at
last to find the car of the flying silver stork.

“That car ... I suppose it will be all right there?”

She seemed to me to lack a proper pride in her car. I said I thought it
would be quite all right there, as though a Hispano-Suiza was a usual
sight near my door; and I suggested that maybe I had better see her
upstairs to her brother’s flat, as it was the top flat and there were no
lights on the stairs. But she appeared to be in no hurry. Thoughtful she
was. She said dimly: “You are very kind....”

One somehow gathered from her voice that her face was very small.

“I’ve often wanted,” she murmured, looking about, “to live in this
place. You know, vaguely....”

“Of course, vaguely,” I said.

She looked at me, seemed to see me for the first time, seemed faintly
surprised to find herself talking to me. I was surprised, too. Maybe it
was the way her hair danced formally on her cheeks that made it look
such a small face, but it seemed to me no larger than a small size in
ladies’ handkerchiefs. That was why I was surprised. She stood
carelessly, like the women in Georges Barbier’s almanacks, _Falbalas et
Fanfreluches_, who know how to stand carelessly. Her hands were thrust
into the pockets of a light brown leather jacket--_pour le sport_--which
shone quite definitely in the lamplight: it was wide open at the
throat, and had a high collar of the fur of a few minks. I once had a
friend who was a taxidermist, and that was how I knew that. One small
red elephant marched across what I could see of her dress, which was
dark and not _pour le sport_.

“Perhaps you are right,” she admitted doubtfully. Not that I had the
faintest idea what she was talking about.

I went before her up the dark narrow stairs, sideways, lighting and
dropping matches, after the custom of six years. There were three floors
in the little house, but the first was untenanted except by mice. I
wondered whether it would interest her if I told her I was leaving
to-morrow, but I did not see why it should. She, after all, had probably
just come back from foreign parts. About her, it was perfectly obvious,
was the aura of many adventures. But I was looking on her in brotherly
sort, interested in her because she was Gerald March’s sister. For that
was a most deficient man in every other respect. Fancy, I thought. She
said: “Oo, isn’t it dark!”

“Of course,” I said, striking yet another match against the wall, “I
knew Gerald _had_ a sister, but I had a vague idea, I don’t know why,
that she was still at school....”

“I don’t suppose,” she said helpfully--stumbled slightly, I helped
her--“that any one knows _everything_. Is that mice downstairs? Rats?
Oo, really.... Gerald and I showed, once upon a time, a strong tendency
to be twins, though there was a good hour between us, so I was told. I
was at the tail end of the hour.” Slowly struggling up those dim,
narrow, musty stairs, her green hat now and then flaming in the
matchlight, she gave one worthless information in a slightly husky,
impersonal voice. As we came up to my landing I asked her if she had
seen Gerald lately.

“Not,” she said, whispered, “for years and years. Nearly ten, I think.
Do you think that comes, perhaps, of having been almost twins once upon
a time?”

I did not say anything for I was thinking hard. Now I was Gerald’s
friend. This lady of the green hat was Gerald’s sister, nay, his twin
sister. Fancy, I thought. Where, I asked myself, did one stand? It was a
matter for thought, for deep thought, and so I treated it, as she did
not appear to be in any great hurry.

Now while these things were passing, the lady and I were standing on my
landing, which was four foot by three; she with one foot on the stair
below, one leather shoulder against the wall. And one had again, with
her, a sense of the conventions.

“You are thinking,” she accused me. “I wonder what about....”

The light that plunged through my half-open sitting-room door fought a
great fight with the shadow of her green hat and lit her face
mysteriously. She was fair. As they would say it in the England of long
ago--she was fair. And she was grave, so grave. That is a sad lady, I
thought. To be fair, to be sad ... why, was she intelligent, too? And
white she was, very white, and her painted mouth was purple in the dim
light, and her eyes, which seemed set very wide apart, were cool,
impersonal, sensible, and they were blazing blue. Even in that light
they were blazing blue, like two spoonfuls of the Mediterranean in the
early morning of a brilliant day. The sirens had eyes like that, without
a doubt, when they sang of better dreams. But no siren, she! That was a
sad lady, most grave. And always her hair would be dancing a tawny,
formal dance about the small white cheeks.

She smiled, when it occurred to her that she was looking at me.

“I know what you are thinking,” she said.

“I wonder!”

“Yes. You like Gerald, don’t you?” She thought about that. “Well, what
you are thinking is, whether it is fair to him to take me up there in
case he is drunk....”

“If only it was ‘in case,’” I said. “You see?”

She closed her eyes.

“Poor Gerald!” she whispered. “Isn’t it a shame!”

“I’m afraid,” I said, “there’s nothing to be done....”

“Oh, I know!” Oh, she seemed to know that from her heart. And I wondered
why they had not seen each other for ten years. I couldn’t imagine her
disliking Gerald--childish, furious Gerald! Probably, I thought, he was
to blame, and I wondered if there was anything in Gerald’s life for
which he was not to blame. Poor Gerald.

“You see,” the slightly husky voice was saying, “I just came to-night on
an Impulse. I am scarcely ever in England....” The voice expired. We
waited, and she acknowledged my patience with a jewel of a smile. “And I
suddenly thought I would like to see Gerald to-night. Please,” she
suddenly begged, so seriously, “won’t you let me? I’d like just to _see_
him ... but if you think ...?”

“Oh,” I said, “come on.”

She laughed, a little nervously, abruptly. Gerald’s door was at the head
of the next flight of stairs, and it was, as usual, wide open. She moved
one step forward into the room, she stopped, her eyes on the ceiling, as
fixed as lamps. Yes, those were very sensible eyes. She didn’t look at
Gerald.

“What is it?” she asked dimly.

“Whisky,” I said. It was so obvious.

“But more than that! There’s certainly whisky, but....”

“Wet shoes....”

“But that’s too literary! Oh, of course! Old women in alms-houses....”

She was talking, it was so easy to see, against her eyes. Now she was
here she didn’t want to see Gerald. She was trying to put off the moment
when her eyes must rest on Gerald. Still just within the dingy room, she
looked everywhere but at Gerald.

“Lot of books,” she said.

I made to go, but the slightest hint of a start detained me. She
suggested her gestures. That was a very quiet lady. She didn’t, if you
please, intrude her womanhood on the occasion. Women do that
unconsciously. But she didn’t do it, unconsciously. She met a man on his
own ground. That was a gallant lady.

“Oh!” she said. “Oh!”

“Might just as well come away,” I muttered. I was used to Gerald, but at
the moment, at her sudden whisper, I would have liked to murder him.
Here for sixteen months not a soul had come to see him--and now, before
his sister, and his twin sister too, he was in this vile state. But she
had insisted on seeing him. What could I do? I promised Gerald a pretty
speech on the morrow. He would be more or less human to-morrow, for
Gerald had those phenomenal recuperative powers that are peculiar to
lean drunkards.

“The illness,” I told her, “goes in periods of three days. On the first
day he is thoughtful, on the second he is thoughtless, and on the third
speechless.”

I could not see her face, her back was to me. The leather jacket, the
brave green hat, the thoughtful poise. But I heard her whisper the name
of the inert thing sprawling half on a broken Windsor chair and half
across the littered table, and it was as though there was a smile in the
whisper, and I thought to myself that these twins must have been great
playmates once upon a time. “Gerald!” she whispered. “Gerald! Gerald!”

“Oh, go to hell!” muttered Gerald, and, without looking up, without
waking up, twitched his head feverishly to one side, upsetting a tea-cup
half-full of whisky.

“He thinks it’s me,” I explained from the door, and suddenly I found her
looking at me over her shoulder, so thoughtfully. I can see her now, the
way she suddenly looked at me, half over her leather shoulder, thinking
I knew not what, and her right hand spread out on her brother’s arm.
There was a striking emerald on the third finger of her right hand,
livid against the dark thing that was Gerald March.

“Only twenty-nine,” she told me gravely, “Gerald and me....”

“Oh,” I said. What could one say?

“Bad luck, I do think,” she murmured. I wondered, you know, whom she was
talking to. Certainly not to me.

“He’s a very good fellow,” I said.

“Heredity, you see,” she suddenly explained. “Father almost died of it.
Brandy, though. He liked brandy, Barty did. They said he would die if he
had more than half-a-bottle a day, but he had a bottle to make sure, and
then he died of pneumonia.”

Then, in her silence, she was so still that I grew very uncomfortable.
What was she thinking about? She was staring down at the sprawling thing
that was her twin brother, the emerald still livid against his arm.

“He wrote a very good book once,” I said, to say something.

“Yes. About Boy....”

“Boy?” Gerald, you see, was no talker. He just swore, but automatically;
it meant nothing.

“Didn’t you know?” She looked at me again, but her eyes seemed to me
masked. I was to know later why her eyes were masked just then. I said I
knew nothing at all about Gerald.

She passed a finger over one of her eyebrows, and looked at it. “Dirty,”
she said.

“Years ago,” she said, “before the war, Gerald had a very great friend.
Gerald, you see, is a hero-worshipper. In spite of his air and
everything, that is what Gerald is, a hero-worshipper. And no hero, no
Gerald. And so, when his hero died, Gerald died too. Funny, life is,
isn’t it? Then the war, and that, of course, buried him. And now....”
Those absorbed, blazing blue eyes! The sea was in them, and the whisper
of all open places: the magic of the sea was in her eyes, whipped with
salt and winds.

“No friends?” she asked dimly. “No women? Nothing?”

And just at that moment I had, for the first time, that feeling of
incapacity with her. I was to have it again, profoundly, but I remember
vividly that it came for the first time just then, in poor, furious
Gerald’s room. Dingy--that is what I felt before this quiet, thoughtful
woman with the absorbed eyes. Dingy. I felt, I suppose, the immense
dinginess of being a human being, for there is an immense, unalterable
dinginess in being human, in the limitation of being human. But why I
should feel that particularly with her I did not know then. She, too,
was human, quiet, gentle, very unaware. But, later, I was to know why.

It was with an effort that I told her about Gerald. That feeling of
self-dinginess came somehow to a point in just feeling common. For I was
what Gerald was not, what she obviously was not. I could somehow “cope
with” my time and generation, while they were of the breed destined to
failure. I was of the race that is surviving the England of Horatio
Bottomley, the England of lies, vulgarity, and unclean savagery; while
they of the imperious nerves had failed, they had died that slow white
death which is reserved for privilege in defeat.

Gerald, I told her, was a more solitary man than I had ever known or
thought to know. I supposed he had a small income, for he seemed to
manage to live. He was very shy, absurdly shy, tortured shy. She nodded
gravely, and I went on to say that shyness was a cruel disease with
Gerald: it was a shyness, to strangers, without charm, for he never
could show his shyness, he must show everything but his shyness. And so
it was that he couldn’t get on with people, and now he had ceased to
try, he just had drinks. Every Sunday afternoon he went to tea with his
aunt, Lady Eve Chalice, in Mount Street.

“It was Eve who really created my impulse,” she told me, then: “Oh,
here!” and I found I had an empty cigarette-case in my hand and that she
was offering me hers. It was an oblong white-jade case, and chained to
it by a double chain of gold was a hectagonal black onyx box which may
or may not have held powder. One corner of the hectagonal black onyx was
initialed in minute diamond letters: I.S.

“Iris,” she said. “Iris Storm.” And she smiled, childishly, formally,
saying: “You have been so nice, I had forgotten we didn’t know each
other.” I told her my name, in that embarrassed way one always does tell
any one one’s name, and we smoked a while in silence. She inhaled her
smoke with a faint hiss, and her teeth were a regiment of even bits of
rice-paper standing at attention, very smart and sharp. Teeth always
give one ideas. These were imperious, dangerous teeth. On a middle one
was wedged a small string of tobacco: it lay coiled there like a brown
maggot, and when I told her about that she removed it with the nail of
her small finger, and regarded it. She had a great talent for looking at
nothing in particular, and that was the only likeness I could see
between the twins: thoughtful they both were. Suddenly, from the tousled
dark head on the table came a jumble of inarticulate words. She listened
intently. Gerald shivered, but his face remained buried in his crossed
arms.

“He’s dreaming,” I said. She looked at me, and I thought there were
tears in her eyes. But as they never fell, I am not sure. Thoughtful she
was, smoking....

“Why does God do these things?” she asked in a suddenly strong, clear
voice, a most surprising voice; but I said nothing, knowing nothing of
God.

“Let us go,” she said.

“Shall I tell him you came?”

She thought about that, looking at me. “Yes,” she said, “will you?
Please. Just that I came. You see, Gerald doesn’t ... well,” she smiled
somewhere in those eyes, “let us say he is against me....”

We were in the doorway of the soiled room of the drunkard. I was going
to switch out the light. Often I would come upstairs and switch out
Gerald’s light.

“Gerald,” she said suddenly, in that strong voice, and I thought of a
prefect’s voice at school, down the corridor of a dormitory. “Good-bye
to Gerald.”

“You see,” she said to me, “Gerald and I are the last Marches, and we
ought to stand together. Don’t you think so?”

“Yes, you ought,” I said gravely. One hand, the hand of the great
emerald, hung against her leather jacket. “Certainly you ought,” I said,
and raised the hand to my lips. Her hand smelt dimly of petrol and
cigarettes, and a scent whose name I shall now never know.

“These defiant courtesies,” she said thoughtfully. “They’re very nice, I
always say....”


III

Slowly, she first, we went down the narrow stairs to my landing. In the
sudden flare of my match there was revealed a threepenny-bit of flesh
just above the heel of her left shoe, and I had occasion to rebuke
myself on the depravity that is man. She said over her shoulder: “Hilary
Townshend has told me about you....”

“But he has never told me about you!”

“Oh, he would if you provoked him!”

“And may I?”

But she did not seem to hear. Once Hilary had, I thought, said something
about Gerald March having a sister, but I had not connected the vaguely
heard name of Mrs. Storm with her. I don’t know why, but I had always
imagined Gerald’s sister as a schoolgirl living somewhere in the country
with a bankrupt old gentleman called Lord Portairley, Gerald’s uncle.

We were on my small landing now, in the light that plunged out of the
half-open door of my sitting-room: she with a foot on the stairs leading
downwards, away.

“Good-bye,” she said. “Really, I think you’ve been very kind....”

She seemed to me very nice and gentle; yes, nice; and then it seemed to
me that across her gentleness flamed a bar of fire. She walked, oh,
impersonally, in the fires of herself. I was on another planet. Hilary
tells me now that he also had that feeling with her; but Hilary must
have struggled against it, whereas I am incapable of struggling against
any feeling.

“Good-bye,” I said.

I was looking not at her but through the half-open door into my room.
There lay the disorder of my life, the jumble, the lack of purpose, the
silence, and the defeat of my life. I wasn’t, it seems almost an
intrusion to say, very happy in those days; but that is by the way in
the history of Gerald March and Iris Storm.

Now here is the difficult part of this history. Of the many gaps it will
contain, this seems to me the most grave, the least excusable. One
should write, if not well, at least plausibly, about the things that
happen. And yet I cannot be plausible about this, because I do not know
how it happened. I mean, how she came into my room and sat down. I did
not ask her. Did she want to? Mrs. Storm was a lady who gave you a sense
of the conventions. Mrs. Storm was a ... and yet ... I do not know
anything about her.

I am trying, you can see, to realise her, to add her together; and, of
course, failing. She showed you first one side of her and then another,
and each side seemed to have no relation with any other, each side might
have belonged to a different woman; indeed, since then I have found that
each side did belong to a different woman. I have met a hundred pieces
of Iris, quite vividly met them, since last I saw her. And sometimes I
have thought of her--foolishly, of course, but shall a man be wise about
a woman?--as some one who had by a mistake of the higher authorities
strayed into our world from a land unknown to us, a land where lived a
race of men and women who, the perfection of our imperfections, were
awaiting their inheritance of this world of ours when we, with that
marvellous indirectness of purpose which is called being human, shall
have finally annihilated each other in our endless squabbles about
honour, morality, nationality.

We have all of us a crude desire to “place” our fellows in this or that
category or class: we like to know more or less what they are, so that,
maybe, we may know more or less what we shall be to them. But, even with
the knowledge that she was Gerald’s sister, that she was twenty-nine
years old, that she was the niece of Lord Portairley, you could not,
anyhow I couldn’t, “place” Mrs. Storm. You had a conviction, a rather
despairing one, that she didn’t fit in anywhere, to any class, nay, to
any nationality. She wasn’t that ghastly thing called “Bohemian,” she
wasn’t any of the ghastly things called “society,” “county,” upper,
middle, and lower class. She was, you can see, some invention, ghastly
or not, of her own. But she was so quiet about it, she didn’t intrude
it on you, she was just herself, and that was a very quiet self. You
felt she had outlawed herself from somewhere, but where was that
somewhere? You felt she was tremendously indifferent as to whether she
was outlawed or not. In her eyes you saw the landscape of England,
spacious and brave; but you felt unreasonably certain that she was as
devoid of patriotism as Mary Stuart. She gave you a sense of the
conventions; but she gave you--unaware always, impersonal always, and
those cool, sensible eyes!--a much deeper sense that she was somehow
outside the comic, squalid, sometimes almost fine laws by which we judge
as to what is and what is not conventional. That was why, I am trying to
show, I felt so profoundly incapable with her. It was not as though one
was non-existent; it was as though, with her, one existed only in the
most limited sense. And, I suppose, she affected me particularly in that
way simply because I am a man of my time. For that is a limitation a man
can’t get beyond--to be of his time, completely. He may be successful, a
man like that--indeed, should he not blow his brains out if he is
not?--but he who is of his time may never rise above himself: he is the
galley-slave working incessantly at the oars of his life, which reflects
the lives of the multitude of his fellows. Yes, I am of my time. And so
I had with this woman that profound sense of incapability, of defeat,
which any limited man must feel with a woman whose limitations he cannot
know. She was--in that phrase of Mr. Conrad’s which can mean so little
or so much--she was of all time. She was, when the first woman crawled
out of the mud of the primeval world. She would be, when the last woman
walks towards the unmentionable end.

“Good-bye,” I said, and then, as I looked from the disordered room and
my disenchanted life at her, the eyes in the shadow of the green hat
were brilliant with laughter, so that I was stunned. “Why are you
laughing?” I asked, or perhaps I did not ask that, perhaps she had not
been laughing at all, for when I was recovered from my stupor her eyes
were quite grave, and dark as in a crypt. I pushed open the door of my
room.

“How I would like,” she said, that husky voice, “a glass of cold water!”
That was what she said, and so I let her go in alone into the
sitting-room, whilst I turned on the tap in the bathroom. Fiercely and
long I let the water run, pleased with the way it was filling the little
house with its clean roar, pleased with the clean scent of the rushing
water, which is always like the scent of cool sunlight. Then she said:
“You have had a quick bath,” and so we became friends.

She stood among the littered books on the floor, looking round at the
disorder, like a tulip with a green head. She sipped the water, looking
round wisely over the rim of the tumbler. I explained that I was leaving
to-morrow, and therefore the disorder.

We talked.

In that disordered room, so littered with books that you might hardly
take a step without stumbling over one, it was not difficult to talk.
Indeed, it is never so easy to talk about books as when they are about
the floor, so that you may turn them over with your foot, see what they
are, pick them up and drop them anywhere with no precious nonsense as to
where they should exactly go.

She waved her glass of water about, sipping it. A drop of water clung
like a gem to the corner of her painted mouth. It was not fair.

Talking with her in that room was like talking with her as we walked on
a windy heath: she threw out things, you caught all you could of them,
you missed what you liked, and you threw something back. Now and then
something would turn up in a voice which was suddenly strong and clear,
and every time her voice was strong and clear you were so surprised that
you did not hear so well as when she spoke inaudibly. She had none of
the organised, agonised grimaces of the young lady of fashion. But one
knew she was not a young lady of fashion, for she hadn’t a sulky mouth.

Hers was that random, uninformed, but severely discriminating taste
which maddens you: you try unsuccessfully to think that there is nothing
at the back of it, nothing but a misty criterion of enjoyment. She used
some words as though she had never heard any one else using them.
“Nice,” for instance, she used in a calmly immense sense. The word
seemed turned topsy-turvy, and to turn everything else topsy-turvy. She
used the word “common,” I think, to denote a thing attempted and
achieved scratchily. Mr. Ernest Bramah was, for instance, not “common.”
But Miss Clemence Dane in _Legend_ was. “Oh, come!” I said, for to me
_Legend_ is an achievement in literature.

“All those women talking and dissecting and yearning together,” she
said. “Their breath smells of ... oh, red hair!” She thought Miss Romer
Wilson was among the greatest writers of the time: _The Grand Tour_
particularly. She was loyal to girlish admirations for Mr. Locke, Mr.
Temple Thurston, Oscar Wilde. D. H. Lawrence was “nice.” “Nice?” I said.
“Well, wonderful,” she said, with wide eyes, so that I was made to seem
slow and stupid. M. Paul Morand was “common,” a “stunt” writer.

“I detest the word ‘stunt,’” I said.

“That is why,” she said, “I used it about Monsieur Morand. He is an
abbreviation, like nightie for nightshirt.” I did not agree with her.
She did not like abbreviations, even lunch for luncheon. “What,” she
asked, “is the hurry?” I could not tell her. She thought that perhaps
English was not the language for abbreviations and diminutives. She
deferred to my judgment about that, and I said what I said. One just
didn’t discuss Barrie: there he was. “You can’t laugh me out of him,”
she smiled, “by calling him whimsical.” She had once enjoyed a book by
Mr. Compton Mackenzie, a garden catalogue called _Guy and Pauline_.
There was Hergesheimer. She put up a gallant, insincere defence for the
Imagistes, but it turned out that she had never read any, and wasn’t at
all sure what they were. “They’re short for poetry,” I said coldly,
“like nightie for nightingale.” But perhaps the book she most profoundly
liked was _The Passionate Friends_, with perhaps the last part of
_Tono-Bungay_. “And, of course,” she said, “_The Good Soldier_,” Mr.
Ford Maddox Hueffer’s amazing romance. From a table she picked up
Joyce’s _Ulysses_, looked at it vaguely, dropped it absently on the
floor amongst the others. I held a watching financial brief for it. One
was to find later that she was completely without a sense of property,
either her own or other people’s.

“It’s a funny thing,” she mused....

“What’s a funny thing?”

“Satirists.... They are all very plain men. Grubby, too. Why?”

“Why?” I said. “But, really----”

She looked at me through the smoke of her cigarette. She was grave,
intent. But one never knew what about....

“Genius,” I said, “has----”

“Of course, genius. But----”

“They are striving,” I said, “for----”

“Yes, I know. But why are they always so ugly? I mean, these people
called ‘satirists.’ One sees them abroad, at the Rotonde, or in Rome,
Florence....” I saw her among them, the small white face, the cool,
sensible, huge eyes, very attentive, deferring. “They marry plain, too.
Always. Invariably. Why? And man and wife hang on to each other like
grim death, despising everything hard. And they come out in spots. Why?
One just wonders.... It seems to need very ugly men with very
unattractive wives to despise things, to show us our ugliness. Has ever
any even fairly human-looking person ever been a ‘satirist’? But I
suppose if they weren’t so plain they wouldn’t have so much time to be
obscene on paper. Or am I talking nonsense?”

“It’s absurd,” I said, “to make it a question of looks----”

“But it makes me furious!” she said in that suddenly strong clear voice.
“These despisers. These grubby clever men with their grubby genius. The
heroes of the weekly reviews. Their impotent little obscenities. I’ve
tried to find, in knowing them and reading them, a great, real contempt,
something as fierce and clean as fire, a nightmare of contempt, so that
from the pillars of burning smoke we can build beings of better shape
than ourselves. I’ve read, watched, listened, wanting to know....”

I said things, too. But who am I? For instance, I said: “You don’t allow
to all men one common failing, which shows particularly when the men are
satirical writers: they must always write about women rather in the
spirit of uncleanminded undergraduates. You should be more tolerant,
Mrs. Storm....”

We talked of vulgarity. She had once read a book of mine, and I
complained bitterly of my vulgarity, saying, you know, that one didn’t
begin by being vulgar, “but one began,” I suggested, “by being just
bumptious. The meeker you are, the more bumptious you probably are
inside, but that does not harm. Not that I was ever really meek. And at
the beginning there’s a tremendous humility in you to yourself. You
can’t have any achievement without that humility, and yet you lose it
later on because you find out all the wrong things about yourself.
People are only too ready to show you the wrong things about yourself.
They like doing it. They seem to think there is something wrong with
conceit. It irritates fools, because they think it is unwarranted. How
do they know if it is unwarranted, and what does it matter if it is or
not? Or it irritates them because they too once had in themselves a
humility to themselves, and then allowed it to be, according to that
Bottomley-Kipling-John-Bull gospel, ‘knocked out of them.’ And so if a
young man is not very strong he lets the mischievous fools take his
conceit away from him, he turns his back on his real conceit, which is
himself--he has it ‘knocked out of him,’ just as any taste for music was
knocked out of him by his public-school--and goes out for one of the
spurious conceits which are called ‘being as others are.’ Then he has
put his feet on the endless and never-ending road of vulgarity, and
there are very few turnings....”

She sat in the deep wicker armchair, which had come with me from Chelsea
six years before but would travel nevermore. It creaked madly as she sat
down, and she glanced at it in surprise. “Of course,” she said, “it’s
contagious....”

“You are quite wrong,” I said. “The real sticky part seems to come from
inside one. And there, you see, is where a writer has a sense of
defeat--a writer, I mean, who must earn his living by writing, and so
must always write. For it is more difficult for a second-rate writer not
to be vulgar than for a camel to pass through a needle’s eye. It uncoils
from somewhere inside you, like a nasty, sticky snake. So slick it is,
too. So helpful, often. And when you see it for the first time you stare
at it transfixed, and you say, ‘But _I_ am not vulgar!’ But you get used
to it later on. Very few people notice it. Most people like it. And, of
course, it pays.”

“The golden snake,” she said. “It’s quite a good snake. It is silly to
despise money.”

“Writers,” I said, and, I think, said rightly, “love money, they adore
money! Successful writers, I mean. The ones who have become venerable,
the ones who have made great names by writing about the irony of life
and the incapabilities of wealth, the writers of the people for the
people. They worship money, they hoard money. One and all despise rich
people, and are perfectly beastly about the upper-classes. You should
ask any publisher about the business capacity of any great author who
writes about the Irony of Life. To really intelligent men of the
middle-classes, living in sin does not seem nearly so wicked as living
in luxurious sin. I only know one successful author who has the decency
to get drunk with his easily-earned money. One should keep a sense of
proportion about money, and you can only do that by throwing it away.
The Jews, for instance----”

“Jews,” she said, “are charming. The rich ones, I mean, and preferably
the fat shiny ones. They understand luxury and elegance, and elegance is
an enchantment that the skin loves. But nowadays only Jews have an idea
of enchantment, only Jews and Americans. Furs, jewels, spacious rooms,
trellised terraces, all lovely baubles, silks of China, myrrh,
frankincense, and motor-cars. The Jews are disenchanted, but at least
they’re brave enough to insist on having all the enchantments of
disenchantment. Luxury, ease, splendour, spaciousness. You’ll say
they’re florid. Well, they may be, they are, but they’re also the last
towers of chivalry. Mr. Chesterton goes running after them shouting
about beer and the Pope, but if you’re going to leave chivalry to
beer-drinkers and the Pope, God help enchantment. You’ll say that the
Americans’ indulgent admiration for their wives almost borders on the
_gaga_, but they fight for it very really, they don’t just talk and
indulge. They fight with money, they have the courage of their cheques,
they dare tremendous duels, they get up at unearthly hours in the
morning to dash towards the rendezvous, and they draw a cheque just as
gallantly as any rather caddish cavalier ever drew a sword....”

“Englishmen,” I said, “_respect_ their women....”

“Maybe,” she said absently.

We were impersonal. Now and then the wicker armchair creaked beneath
her, and she looked at it with faint surprise. Now and then a car
screamed on Piccadilly, an electric-landau sounded its bells through
Shepherd’s Market towards its garage by Camelot House. Now and then her
slightly husky voice expired. Then we waited a while. She stared deeply
into the eyes of a mask which a Russian artist had once given me in
exchange for a poker debt. It lay sideways against a corner of the
fender. I waited for her to say something about that, for it was the
mask of a Florentine gentleman that was a lecher. I had grown used to
it, as one can grow used to anything, but people would remark on it
adversely. The lady of the green hat said nothing, and that was how I
knew that for her everything was inevitable. That is an important thing
to know about a woman, for you know then that you will never know where
you are.

We became personal. She said: “Let us talk about our friends now.”

“To-night,” I said, “I have been to a party at the Hallidays’.”

“Ah, the pitiless vulgarians! Surely, between us, we can do better than
that!”

“There’s Hilary....”

“The sweet! Can you _not_ love Hilary? But to-night,” she said very
seriously, “I have been dining with old Maurice Harpenden. How he would
hate me to say old! I went out all the way to Sutton Marle to do that,
because he expects it of me when I am in England. We are enemies, and we
watch each other. He was very courtly. They are difficult to deal with,
handsome old men who have known one since one was so high. You need to
be a woman to know what I mean, but you must try to pretend for a
minute. Thank you. Organically, of course, they are perfect. Good
features and long legs and iron-grey hair. Character and clothes by
Robert Hichens. They are very courtly, and then they touch one. Now, why
do they do that? They pretend to do it in a friendly way, as any
gentleman of the old school might to the daughter of another gentleman
of the old school: but they make _opportunities_....” The husky voice
committed suicide, was buried, and in the third second rose from the
dead. “I do not understand men. I do not understand the ‘old school’
type of man, nor what ‘old school’ means, unless it means that you never
did anything at school except win the Battle of Waterloo. Then as soon
as you left school you were qualified by good-looks, a charm of manner,
and a habit of becoming popular with elderly men which is peculiar to
right-minded young Englishmen, to become Major-General Sir Maurice
Harpenden, K.C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., and to lead your troops in battle
with that gallant inefficiency patented by English infantry-commanders
who know a good horse when they see one. After which you can spend the
rest of your life in _bantering_. You can see that I do not like
Maurice. We dine, and we are enemies, and we watch each other.”

“The sire doesn’t seem very like the son. Napier is a saint....”

The chair creaked. She was looking at me from under her hat, gravely as
a Red Indian. “There were two roads leading from a certain tree, and
when we were eighteen life said to me, ‘You go this way,’ and life said
to Napier, ‘You go that way.’ And so we did that, and so it has
been....”

Now I was staring at her mouth, which was a silky red mouth engraved
with I don’t know how many deep downward lines, and my heart beat twice
so loudly that I wondered if she had heard it, for she whispered
sharply: “Listen!” But it was only a clock striking somewhere in London,
and its striking was quickly done.

“I must go,” she said, but not even the armchair creaked, and her green
hat was still crushed against the back of the chair, and her eyes were
still staring profoundly over my shoulder. There was only the window
there. The curtains were not drawn, and I thought I would draw them,
but it seemed a pity to move. Her eyes glowed like an animal’s. She was
staring, absorbed, over my right shoulder, but there was only the window
there. She was asleep. Then her eyes dilated into glowing points, and
her lips said: “_On a envie._”

Then she made a gesture of distaste.

She said: “There are desires....”

“Heavens, do you need to tell me that!”

“Oh, not those desires!” Expressionless, blazing eyes absorbed over my
shoulder, she waved away “those desires.” I was snubbed.

“They call it,” she said, “the desire-for-I-know-not-what. They will
find it one day when we are dead and all things that live now are dead.
They will find it when everything is dead but the dreams we have no
words for. It is not chocolate, it is not cigarettes, it is not cocaine,
nor opium, nor sex. It is not eating, drinking, flying, fighting,
loving. It is not love’s delight, it is not bearing children, though in
that there are moments like jewels. There is one taste in us that is
unsatisfied. I don’t know what that taste is, but I know it is there.
Life’s best gift, hasn’t some one said, is the ability to dream of a
better life....”

The green hat crushed recklessly against the back of the chair, she
stared, still and absorbed, at the names that friends of long-ago had
written on the ceiling with smoke of candle-flame. Her eyes glowed,
glowed like an animal’s. The light of the reading-lamp on the littered
table by my elbow kissed her lip, and the light kissed the faint, faint
down on her lip into a few minutes of existence as a garden of gold
dust. A sword lay in my mind, twisting and shining among the inner
grotesqueries where we keep ourselves, in the real sense, to ourselves.

I forced my mind to a more legal aspect of her. There were two rings on
her wedding finger. A narrow circle of platinum, a narrow circle of
gold. I wondered if she had been married twice. I tried to imagine her
husbands. They would be tall, handsome men, and she would be
passionately in love with them. She would, like all women in love with
tall, handsome men, be worshipful as a dog. Physically they would be
very courteous to her, but no more than courteous, and mentally they
would, if I may say so, treat her rough. They would go to sleep quickly,
and she would lie awake far into the night, pressing her breasts,
because they hurt her. She would think. She would not think. Then one
day, when she was between thinking and not thinking, she would be
unfaithful, and the tall, handsome man who was her husband would
apologise to her for not having understood her better. But she would
say, with cold eyes: “There is nothing to understand. _On a envie._”
Then he would say, “Oh!” and instruct her lawyers to divorce him.

“I was trying,” I said, “to imagine your husband....”

The chair creaked, and from the shadow of the hat one blue eye looked at
me like a blue stone worn by fire. “Two,” she said. “They are dead.”

I wondered what she saw, looking over my shoulder. She kept strange,
invisible company, this lady. She walked in measureless wastes, making
flames rush up from stones, making molehills out of mountains. Then
suddenly the headlines of a penny paper of two years ago unrolled before
my mind, stood livid against my memory, slashed with the name of Storm.
I had not a doubt but that he had been her second husband. “V.C.
murdered. Sinn Feiners kill Captain Storm, V.C. Left on roadside with
five bullet wounds....”

She said suddenly: “I am a house of men.”

“What!” I said. “You surprise me.”

“A house of men. Of their desires and defeats and deaths. Of their
desires, yes, of their deaths, yes and yes. It is, you can see, a great
responsibility for me, and I have lodged complaints about it, but it is
no use. I am a house of men. Ah me, ah me! Oh, dear! My friend, there is
a curse, a quite visible curse. On us, the Marches. You will see it in
my eyes one day, and you will be sorry for me.”

“You mustn’t believe in curses,” I said. “Good God, curses!”

“The Marches,” she said, “are never let off anything. That is the
curse.”

Her eyes were stronger than mine, even as wind is stronger than air, and
always in them was the magic of wide open places. I looked down, and far
below, like pearls in the dust, shone two ankles clasped in silk the
colour of daylight. I thought of her fate and of her. I thought of
corruption, of curses, of death, of life, of love, and of love’s
delight. I took hold of the sword in my mind with both hands, but was
not strong enough to lift it. I thought of the limbs of Aphrodite, of
the sighs of Anaïtis, of the sharp cries of love’s delight. I thought
how charming men would be if they could misbehave outwardly as prettily
as they can in their minds. I said: “And so the house of March, fatal
and damned, can never avoid its destiny....”

“Yes,” she said reasonably, “it can avoid it. By not being weak enough
to desire so strongly.”

“Oh, I see,” I said.

“I’m glad you see,” she said gravely. They listen to voices whispering
dreams. While they listen, they do queer weak things. Of the soil
sordid--there is your March. But there is another March, who listens to
voices whispering dreams. My father, Barty March, was, I think, one of
the most loved men of his time. Like Napier is now, but of course Napier
behaves. A policeman found Barty early one morning on the doorstep of a
house we had then in Cambridge Square. He used to say he was never drunk
until he closed his eyes, but this time he had closed his eyes into
pneumonia. He only opened them once again, to look at Gerald and me,
sixteen years old apiece. He smiled, you know, because Barty couldn’t
help smiling. Besides, he was happy at last. “Avoid dreams,” he said.
“Never stop to listen to the clouds passing overhead. You will be run
over. Never sympathise with the moon when you can hear it, cold and
lonely and blind, crooning to itself like a corpse singing a hymn. You
will catch pneumonia. Never dream of a world in which men are men and
women are women. You will go mad....”

Her right hand hung limp over the arm of the chair. It was just faintly
dirty, and the nails shone like pink ivory. The emerald on the third
finger held my eyes enchanted for a long while. She smiled at my look,
and as she lay her eyes swept falcon-like down to the stone. It made me
rise out of myself, that falcon-like sweep of her clear eyes, and I
thought of the pitiless misbehaviour of life, that had not let her stay
within the sensible stability of marriage.

“It’s a bit loose,” she was saying.

“I was wondering. It’s such a beauty! Aren’t you afraid of it falling?”

She shook her head, staring at me with a mischievous smile. Her
childishness did not jar. She was always herself. “Oo, no! I have a
knuckle. I crook it. And lo, it doesn’t fall....”

“But this sounds like a plot!”

“It is a law,” she said. “There are four laws, variously entitled a, b,
c, d. The law (a) declares, against all formerly-held beliefs, that a
flower is less beautiful because it is sure to die. That is a religious
law, having to do with the unworth of perishable things, if you see what
I mean. The law (b) has something to do with the fact that all men with
long legs make poor lovers. That is a pagan law. You might write an
essay on the long arm of coincidence and the short legs of
co-respondents. It would be fun for you. The law (c) has something to do
with exhorting a woman never to trust a man of honour, for he serves two
mistresses. That is the law of good sense for amorous women, and will
save them disappointment. The law (d) has to do with this ring, which is
a bit loose, according to the directions of Jehovah.”

“You have mighty friends, Iris Storm!”

“Ah, I need them! Desire is a child with hungry eyes, and for him a
dragon lies waiting. This ring is a charm against dragons.” The slightly
husky voice dreamed. It was an hour for dreaming. She would mask unhappy
things with passing talk. “I called him Jehovah because the same was a
jealous God. And I would mock him with that, saying that it was I who
should be jealous of him, for doesn’t a man of honour serve two
mistresses, while it is well known of women of dishonour, I would mock
him, that they never serve but one god at a time. But he never was a
worldly man, and so eaten by doubt that you would have laughed if he
hadn’t been such a pet....”

“And so he gave you the emerald to be as a witness against you, and to
testify against your frailty?”

“Now take,” dreamed the husky voice, the great eyes fixed on the
ceiling; and there was a smile in them, like a distant wave of music;
“now take a night in Algeria. Take also a hill, and on the hill a
garden....”

“The Hotel St. George, Mustapha Supérieur, Algiers----”

“Ah, don’t forget the American Bar!”

“And the Benares bowls----”

“And _calorifères_ too hot or too cold----”

“And Arab carpets from Victoria Street----”

“And Americans with low heels----”

“And a passion for ‘mailing postals----’”

“Not to mention veal every day----”

“And a Soirée de Gala every Saturday----”

“And the best-dressed women----”

“Of Tunbridge Wells.”

“But take instead some red and purple flowers against a yellow wall,
some oranges, a tangerine or two, three gazelles on a tennis-court,
poppies tall as choir-boys, the cactus, the palm, and the pyramid
cypress-tree. And watch, my friend, two shadows that walk in the wicked
shadow of the pyramid cypress, that stands in the garden like a dark
torch keeping watch over disillusion. It is night, or have I already
told you that? Ah me, ah me, now will she who walks there ever forsake
her love, will she ever be disloyal to her vows, that were made with so
much pomp and circumstance in the Guards’ Chapel at Westminster before a
congregation notable for the absence of all her husband’s relations?
Why, her heart is confident, her heart is fragrant with the honey of
that moon’s passage, and she knows what she knows. And yet, and here is
a most pitiful thing, there must be something in her, some fatal
abandon, that sets men doubting, for he who walked with her in the
wicked shadow of the pyramid cypress wore the silence of the destroyer,
so that her heart cried that he was misnamed, for the mortal disease of
his heel was suspicion. Now I must tell you that it was Christmas Eve,
and after a little desultory conversation he said: ‘Here is a present
for you, sweet,’ and he gave me this emerald which you are kind enough
to admire. ‘Alas,’ I said, ‘it is a little big for me! It may fall from
my finger, don’t you see?’

“‘Yes, it may fall,’ said he. ‘But if you are careful, my sweet, if you
curve your knuckle in time, it won’t dream of falling, not it!’ And then
I cried miserably, knowing there was a catch in this somewhere, for at
that time I was not yet broken in and was still fearful of suspicion.
And I cried: ‘Hector Storm, what do you mean?’

“‘I mean, Iris, that you are as that ring----’

“‘Beautiful but loose, Hector? Ah, _timeo Danaos_!”

“‘Iris, will you never be serious! Yes, you are as that ring, which you
must always wear on the third finger of your right hand. And as that
ring may fall, Iris, so you may fall, for that is the sort of woman you
are. But as that ring may be kept from falling, so may you keep yourself
from falling. Oh, God,’ he said, ‘my life is darkness without you, I
love you so, and it’s a perfect hell with you, I love you so!’ And he
said much more that is unmentionable, and I learnt something, for it is
only by listening to their husbands in moments of intimacy that
well-brought-up women can become acquainted with certain good old
English words. And though I pleaded bitterly that he was unfair to me,
saying I was chained to him as my wrist might be chained to a star,
which was no more than the truth, he insisted that I could be constant
only to inconstancy, and so I was tired and went to bed. But look! Oh,
look! Please look! Ah, the discourtesy of time! Really I must go now!”

I drew my eyes from her eyes to see that the dawn had slyly thrown a
grey handkerchief over the window. It was but the shape of the dawn
creeping out into the night, it was but a ghostly breath in the night,
but it was the dawn. And I did not know what to say, for can a man deny
the dawn, that speaks good sense in its vast elemental language?

The chair creaked and creaked. She was going now, there was no doubt
about it. The texture of her face was grave, she was busy with the angle
of her green hat. I examined the sword in my mind. The chair creaked and
creaked, and then it was as though snapped by silence, and our startled
eyes joined over the emerald that lay on the floor like the echo of the
kiss, which was an unfair kiss. She shivered faintly, and drew herself
taut, and was very proud. She was remote as the evening star, and very
proud. Her eyes were dark as in a crypt, and her eyes looked lost, as
though she had strayed into a maze. I lit a cigarette, and found my
throat dry and parched.

She found difficulty in speaking. I was amazed.

“No,” she said. She shook her head. “Certainly not. My ring, please.”

Imperiously her finger pointed to the floor, but her eyes were as
plaintive as a nun’s who has strayed into one of the corridors of hell.
That I might walk with her there I again made myself a Judas to her
hand, and she shivered with her whole body as in a torment, and she
seemed to bite her lip from within.

“It means nothing,” she said coldly.

“I know,” I said.

She breathed deeply, with a hand pressed to one breast, as though it
hurt her. I think it must have hurt her very much. I was sorry. She
shook her head, as though she was in a cage, and then she was as still
as a cut flower. The whole brim of the green hat was between me and her
face, we were both terribly alone. Her right hand drooped naked over the
arm of the chair, and I was bending down to pick up the emerald to
replace it on the third finger when a cautious knocking came from
below.

That was the second or third time of knocking, and each time it was less
cautious, and I knew it to come from the policeman on the beat, who
would be wishing to have the primrose car put in its proper place, which
was not on the King’s highroad. I wondered if she had heard, but I could
not see her face. I wondered if she heard me move. As I came to the door
I switched out the light and the dawn pounced on her green hat, but she
who wore it fought her battles carved in stone. She said something, I
did not catch what, and I went downstairs and spoke with the policeman,
who was an amiable middle-aged man of my acquaintance.

“My brother is with me,” I said, “but he will be gone soon.” Shepherd’s
Market was creeping out into the dawn, draped and mysterious with the
shadows of night. A window here and there was alight against the dark
pile of Camelot House. The great car stood like a bruise against the
passage of eternity, dawn fought for it, night draped it, and the silver
stork flew unseen. The small noises of dawn stirred sharply in the
night, and the lamps wore pale, tired faces. “Summer’s well on,” said
the policeman.

I re-entered the sitting-room, saying impersonally: “I’m afraid you must
go, as....” The room was empty. The figure that had been carved in stone
was wrapped in air. The disorder of the room lay jeering at me on the
dim carpet of the dawn. It was all like a purposeless limbo stretched
between the night and the day, the room, my life, hers, everything, the
strong, the silly and the brave. The hundreds of books lay in soiled
confusion on the floor, the wisdom of the world that has gone to the
making of the soiled nothings that we are.

I was seized by a catholic anger against the woman. Through all the
disenchantments of youth, despite the contagious impurities of life, in
defiance of the crimes against love that we call love, I had kept
romance for my ghostly companion. Romance was more than a silly lithe
goddess coming down from a marble column. Romance was more than the
licence to be shameless with clouded eyes. Romance did not steal through
the fleshy portals of the heart, did not shiver at a Judas kiss, did not
coil white trembling limbs into the puerile lusts of the mind. Romance
was all that and was as much greater than that as a religion is greater
than a church. To romance, which was the ultimate vision of commonsense,
sex, as sex, was the most colossal bore that had ever distracted man
from his heritage. And she would palm a facet of this colossal bore off
on me! She would have me barter my ghostly companion for the fall of an
emerald, she would invade my thoughts, perhaps my life, in exchange for
a puny pleasure that needs love to exalt it above the matchless
silliness of what, with an excessive zeal for scientific classification,
is known to our civilisation as the sexual act.

I picked up the emerald from the floor, and it smiled in the palm of my
hand.

In the dusk of the bedroom, she lay coiled on the bed. The hush of her
breathing was no more than the trembling servant of the silence. Then
she coughed a small cigarette cough. It was the usual cough, and gave
me back my confidence. “Iris Storm!” I said, but I wondered if I had
spoken, the frail silence was so undisturbed. She was asleep.

Perhaps it was then that I realised that she was beautiful. She was
asleep. Could any but the shape of beauty dare to wear that
impertinence! She lay on her side, she lay anyhow. The green hat was
gone.

“Iris!” I said. Her hair was thick and tawny, and it waved like music,
and the night was tangled in the waves of her hair. It was like a boy’s
hair, swept back from the forehead, which was a wide, clear forehead,
clean and brave and sensible as a boy’s. Sensible, oh dear! The tawny
cornstalks danced their formal dance on the one cheek that I could see,
and the tip of a pierced ear played beneath them, like a mouse in the
cornfield. Above her neck her hair died a very manly death, a more manly
death than “bobbed” hair was ever known to die, and so it comes about
that Iris Storm was the first Englishwoman I ever saw with “shingled”
hair. This was in 1922.

I decided that I did not know what to do. I decided that that was just
as well. “I will play,” I thought, “a waiting game,” and lit a
cigarette. But in her tawny hair the night was tangled like a promise,
and it smelled as grass might smell in a faëry land, and always about
her there was that faint dry scent whose name I shall now never know.
Her mouth drooped like a flower, and there was a little shiny bit in the
valley between her cheek and her nose. To this I applied a little
_Quelques Fleurs_ talc powder on a handkerchief, that when she awoke she
should not think so ill of herself as I did. Hers was a small, straight
nose with an imperceptible curve, just as any straight line might have,
and its tip quivered a little as she breathed. Her leather jacket _pour
le sport_, that had a high collar trimmed with some minks, was flung
open, and over the breast of her dark dress five small red elephants
were marching towards an unknown destination. Towards her feet her hat
lay with my hat.

Gently, gently, gently as the phantom of myself, for was I not being
better than myself? I would replace the emerald on the third finger of
her right hand. I would, when hair that was not my own was pressed
against my ear, and fingers that were not my own took the cigarette from
my mouth, and teeth that were not mine bit my lip, and when the red
elephants marching towards an unknown destination stirred breasts full
of shadows, and a voice as clear and strong as daylight said: “But
enough of this hell!”


IV

Of all that had once decorated the walls of my sitting-room there was
left by the removers only a looking-glass in an ancient gold frame,
above the fireplace. My mother had once given me an oil-painting,
saying, “This will do nicely for your flat,” but I in my pride had
thought a looking-glass would offend the frame more judiciously.

She stood before that.

“What is the time?” she asked her reflection, and I told her that it was
ten minutes to six.

“Have you a comb?” she asked of her reflection, and luckily I had a comb
which was not my comb. She looked at it and saw that it was so.

“Thank you,” she said to her reflection.

The light of the tawny hair mocked the clouded daylight, and when, with
the palm of her hand on her forehead, she swept the comb from front to
back, it flamed tiger-tawny and ate into my spirit. _Tiger, tiger,
burning bright, in the forests of the night...._

In the Upper Fifth at school there was a tall, cold-eyed blood called
Dwight-Rankin--I think he died on Gallipoli--who used to sit at the desk
just in front of mine. He was a man of the mode, wearing his fair hair
plastered from front to back, and his neck was clean and unspotted as a
girl’s, and I would spend minutes wondering whether, if one touched the
gold down in which his hair ended high above his neck one would feel
hair or only skin. The back of her head affected me like that; it was
just like Dwight-Rankin’s, only dry, and tiger-tawny.

She tore the small comb through the dancing curls on each cheek, so that
they trembled like voiceless bells. It is a commonplace about women, as
assiduously remarked by brilliant feminine psychologists as women’s
“caprice” and “intuition,” that every woman must now and then make a
“grimace of distaste” into a looking-glass. But she did not do that, nor
need to. She was untouched, unsoiled, impregnable to the grubby,
truthful hand of _lex femina_. She was like a tower of beauty in the
morning of the world. The outlaw was above the law of afterwards,
impervious and imperious. She was beautiful, grave, proud. How beautiful
she was now! It was a sort of blasphemy in her to be so beautiful now,
to stand in such ordered loveliness, to be neither shameful like a
maiden nor shameless like a mondaine, nor show any fussy after-trill of
womanhood, any dingy ember of desire. It was a sort of blasphemy in her,
as it would be in a peacock to sing gracefully.

The silence got on my nerves, and I said something, anything. She looked
over her shoulder at me, vaguely. She was the male of the species that
is more fearless than mankind. I wondered what she was going to say.

“My hat, please,” she said. I appeared to have been holding it in my
hand. With her left hand she crushed it on her head and kept her hand on
the crown, looking at herself intently in the looking-glass. I was
startled at her eyes in the looking-glass. They were cold blue stones,
expressionless, caddish as a beast’s.

Down, down, with two fingers of her left hand, she pulled the brim of
the green hat over her left eyebrow. She said: “I think I must have left
my powder in the other room. Do you mind?” I brought her the case of
white jade and the box of black onyx. She powdered, without interest.

“Good-bye,” she said. Her hand was held out, her eyes were full on mine,
naked, expressionless. I felt that they were the heads of the nails
under which she had nailed herself. It would be a kindness to let her go
quickly, a kindness which she would not have allowed me had I been a
woman and she a man.

“Good-bye,” I said. And suddenly the hand that lay in mine pressed mine,
and she gave a vague, brittle laugh.

“It seems a pity,” she said; and then the eyes in the shadow of the brim
seemed to open wide, wide.

“You see?” she whispered. “You see?”

But I could see nothing but her silhouette against the future days. I
said: “We have begun at the wrong end; but can’t we work back?”

“Oh, no!” she whispered. “It is not like that a bit. You don’t
understand....”

Suddenly I said many things.

She seemed, her hand still in mine, to be absorbed in something just
behind my right shoulder. There was such fear in her eyes that I cried
sharply: “What is it?”

“The beast,” said the lips of the eyes of fear. “Just the beast....”

The word I said was drowned in the din of a lorry that smashed through
Whitehorse Street to Piccadilly. She took her hand gently from mine.
“There is a dream,” she said, “and there is a beast.”

She smiled.

“That’s all,” she said.

“I can understand regret,” I said, “but----”

“Ah, we can understand, you and I! We are as old as sand ... at this
moment.”

“But, Iris Storm, regret seems like a scar on you!”

“Not regret,” she said, so calmly. “Shame.” And she took my hand again,
closely. “You must forgive me. I couldn’t have said that to any other
man. My shame mustn’t shame you, please! But you have a cold mind, you
are disenchanted, you understand. And oh, if one could be assoiled in
human understanding! You see, I am not what you think. I am not of the
women of your life. I am not the proud adventuress who touches men for
pleasure, the silly lady who misbehaves for fun. I am the meanest of
all, she who destroys her body because she must, she who hates the thing
she is, she who loathes the thing she does....” The breathless, pregnant
voice seemed to fall to the floor, like a small bird with broken wings,
and as it struggled upwards I said: “You are like a boy after his first
love.”

“Oh, if it was boyishness!” And she took from the pocket of her leather
jacket a tube of gold, and she broke it into two pieces, and she stared
moon-struck at the carmine tongue of the lip-salve.

“To be born a chaste woman,” she said to the carmine tongue, “is good. I
am in favour of chastity. I would die for purity, in theory.” She
painted her mouth, staring moon-struck into the daylight. “Yes, I would
die for purity. I wouldn’t mind dying anyhow, but it would be nice to
die for purity....”

I said thus and thus.

“Yes,” she said, not having heard a word of mine, “it is not good to
have a pagan body and a Chislehurst mind, as I have. It is hell for the
body and terror for the mind. There are dreams, and there are beasts.
The dreams walk glittering up and down the soiled loneliness of desire,
the beasts prowl about the soiled loneliness of regret. Good-bye.”

“Then it must be ‘good-bye’?”

She looked at me with a strange, dark friendliness, and nodded.

“Because of shame,” she said. “But if I were different, I would like you
for my friend----”

To my interruption, which she did not hear, she said: “I have only one
lover. But I know that only because I always feel unfaithful to him. It
would be good to be really bad, but I am not even that. I only
misbehave. I will see you again, when I have found my only love. Or I
will see you again when I am qualified to die for purity. I will let you
know, so you can be there. God bless you, dear.”

And I said what I said, that He had, with Iris Storm.

She went very white. “That shall be written down,” she whispered, “as
the prayer of the only man who ever shamed a woman of her shame.”

“My days of adventure, Iris Storm, are over. A few years ago it would
have seemed nothing to me that you should disappear as you came, into
the great hole of London. To experts in adventure that is, I think, the
usual procedure. But now I would like a trace of you. You must not leave
me, quite. If I may not see you again, mayn’t I perhaps talk to you? Or,
what is the main thing, feel that I could if I dared?”

She said she was in London now only on business that would last a few
weeks, and lived always abroad. “But this is the telephone-number,” she
said, and I was looking round for paper and pencil when she said “Here!”
and her leather arm darted to the floor and came up with a book, and on
the fly-leaf of the book she scrawled the number with her lip-stick.

High above the sharp noises of the young day I heard the scream of an
electric-horn.




CHAPTER TWO: THE CAVALIER OF LOW CREATURES


I

And that, I think, is all that there really is about me, as a person, in
the tale. Of course, this first person singular will continue, and
there’ll no doubt be any amount of “I this” and “I that,” but that is
because of the nature of the work, and there’s never, the way I see it,
much more than a pen behind it. Hilary, however, and Guy de Travest are
not of my mind about this. We have recently been talking about these
affairs, and a sad enough talk they made, and my two friends, my two
seniors, were reluctantly compelled, they said, to disagree with me
about my lack of responsibility in the events to be related hereinafter.

To me, the way I see it, it looks as though certain things were decreed
to happen and that, therefore, they did happen: they had it in their
blood, these people, that certain things should happen to them, and I
could no more contrive these things than they could evade them. But
Hilary and Guy, murmuring together in that astonishing unison which can
only be found in two Englishmen who disagree upon everything in the
world but on the fact that conduct is three parts of life, are of
opinion that my substitution of the word “ptomaine” for “septic” really
affected the course of events. Had I, they say in effect, spoken the
truth like a brave little man, there would have been a divorce and every
one would by now have been happy, as happiness goes. And then, too, they
have something to say about those two red lights, those two rear-lamps
of two cars sweeping into South Audley Street--had I told Iris, they
say, about Gerald, those two red lights never would have been so close
together. Oh, Guy, what a man is that! That latter-day thunder-god of
dandies, that warrior of conduct, that man of cold eyes who never could
give “gratuitous information” about any one! Oh, Hilary, that friend of
childhood!

Hilary and Guy, friends of the late Barty March, had known Gerald and
Iris since their earliest childhood. But Gerald had no sooner grown up
than, at the impulse of his furious nature, he had turned away from his
friends, his people: he had dropped out, had cut away; and no one, it’s
not difficult to imagine, would want to intrude on that young man. But I
was to find, after the coming of the lady of the green hat, that it
wasn’t only at the impulse of his furious nature that Gerald had, well,
withered fiercely into solitude. In very truth that Gerald had been a
hero-worshipper; and in very truth he had become, as his sister had
said, a nothing without his hero. Very few things had ever mattered to
Gerald Haveleur March; but those few things, one was to learn, had
mattered far too much.

His sister was, as it’s not impossible to have gathered, what is called
_declassée_--even for a March or a Portairley. And that was why I had
heard nothing about her from Guy or Hilary, for while Guy never gave
gratuitous information about any one, Hilary was held in thrall by that
upside-down but virulent form of snobbery which will make of a man of
property an extreme Liberal and a thorough-going die-hard disapprover of
any one who let his, Hilary’s, caste down. Hilary, a sincerely good man,
was an enemy of caste, he was an enemy of his own caste in particular,
he did not believe in it; and yet, in the depths of that being where
lurks a dragon that can ultimately defeat even the sincerity of a man of
principle, Hilary believed in nothing else but caste.

And Iris, of course, had betrayed her caste to perfection. No one, you
might say, could have done that more thoroughly than Iris. She had been
malinspired to excess, she had reached Excelsior in the abyss. But she
was ever completely not on her guard about what people might say or did
say, she had an amazing, an enviable, snapped Hilary, talent for just
not noticing things.

She had been quite surprised, Hilary told me recently, when once he had
taxed her with being a renegade from her class. Genuinely surprised she
was, Hilary says. It simply hadn’t, she had told him, occurred to her in
that light.

“Rushing about Europe like that,” Hilary had said, “you let England
down. You’ve no idea, Iris, how these young foreign blighters hold
Englishwomen cheap.” Iris had maintained she had a very good idea about
that. (But you simply had to disagree with Hilary. He was like that. And
he said “hm” all the time.) And you only had to travel on a liner to
the East, she had said, to notice how British matrons reacted to foreign
parts. As for Egypt! But she always did her best, she had said, to
influence foreigners to a more lofty view of the gallantries of British
matrons.

“People cut you,” Hilary had said, for that seemed to him an abominable
thing, that she should have put herself into the position of being
“cut”; and she had admitted having noticed glaciers, but she had
maintained that it was a far, far better thing to be cut by a county eye
than to be killed by the boredom of a county tongue. “I arose from the
dead when I was twenty,” she had said. (Hilary, you understand, would
provoke any one.) “Your class,” Hilary had snapped, and she had said she
had never actually thought of herself as belonging to any class. Her
class would be, she supposed, the landed gentry, same as Hilary’s. She
was proud, she had said, to belong to the same class as Hilary, and was
very sorry indeed if she had hit him in the eye with her heel. But she
hoped, she had said, that with him she had always been a lady.

That had annoyed Hilary very much indeed. But everything about any woman
he liked would annoy Hilary very much indeed. Mr. Townshend was one of
those Englishmen with an unlimited capacity for disapproving of any
woman, whom he liked, who enjoyed being with other men as much as with
himself; and an unlimited capacity for finding other reasons than that
for his disapproval.

As for Gerald, Hilary had last known him as a “dark diabolical
schoolboy” with a disturbing capacity for threatening silences and an
immense--“a corroding, almost,” Hilary said--admiration for Iris. But
not long after Barty March’s death--every one had loved _that_
drunkard!--he had quite lost sight of Gerald. Guy de Travest had been
Gerald’s colonel in the Grenadiers for some time during the war, but he
never spoke but once of Gerald as a soldier--“young hell-fire
idiot”--and never went near him while he lived above me in Shepherd’s
Market. “Reminds me,” Guy said, “too much of Barty left standing too
long with the cork out.” And that was more or less what Hilary said,
too. One must say this for the warriors of caste and conduct: they
seldom try to improve any man.

This chapter has been called The Cavalier of Low Creatures because it is
about Gerald, and therefore it is a short chapter, for what on earth is
there to say about Gerald? It isn’t at all a good description of him,
but it is intended, if you please, more as a flourish, a naïve gesture.
For you simply can’t let Gerald stand without a flourish, without a
something, anything. Besides, I liked him, and would like to do him a
bit of good. He was, _sans_ gesture, a zero with a scowl and a hat--and
a hat. Certainly, he once wrote a novel, but who does not once write a
novel? I liked Gerald, but I would not give him a line if he wasn’t
essential; and that is just what he is, essential, for these things
simply couldn’t have happened without Gerald. He hated his sister, he
had not seen her for ten years, yet it turned out that he was the most
important factor in her life. And, decidedly, her love for him was one
of the most important factors in _her_ life. I wonder if he knows. But
he too, even he, grew up in the end. I can hear him now, through the
twilight of East Chapel Street, his shoulder against the saloon-door of
the inn. “Give her my love,” he said. But you will hear him.


II

Sometimes I would see Gerald in the Café Royal. I would be dining, with
Hilary maybe, and in the distance, cut as with a sharp knife in the
tapestry of smoke and grubby faces, would be Gerald, darkly alone, a
glass of whisky on the marble-top before him. One wouldn’t attempt to
join him, for it made Gerald shy, desperate, if any one sat with him
while drinking. He hated being “messed about,” did Gerald; and if you
joined him he would presently mutter something about an appointment
(Gerald with an appointment!), leave his drink unfinished and go and
order one somewhere else; and as I understood he hadn’t much money I did
not like to drive him to that. Maybe, though, he was less shy with me
than with any one. “I like you,” he once said--oh, darkly!

One never knew, as he sat there or as he strode about the streets,
careless as a fakir impelled always towards a terrible and nameless
penance, what he could be thinking of. Maybe he was thinking of nothing.
Once I saw him come out of a Cinema Theatre with a look on his face as
though he had been tortured. He always looked, you know, like
something. You noticed him.

He had a grey suit. It was thin as paper, but still defiantly retained a
little of that casual elegance which not even Gerald could wholly
divorce from the combination of a good tailor and a lean Englishman. He
never had but one other suit that I ever saw, a brown affair, but he
bartered that with a boot-mender in Shepherd’s Market in exchange for
mending his shoes. And he had a hat. That was a hat. And never was
Gerald seen wearing an overcoat, no matter whether it blew, rained,
snowed or froze. See him any winter evening striding down Half-Moon
Street in the biting rain, his thin grey suit blackening with it, the
jacket held by one button with deep creases into his waist, the shapes
of his knuckles stuck through his trouser pockets, that hat--there, but
for the grace of God, went the most lovable man I ever met.

“Gerald--I say, Gerald! Why don’t you wear a coat on a day like this?
Gerald, aren’t you an ass!”

“Coat?” Thoughtful he was always, and his dark, sunk eyes would pierce
the pavement or the sky with unutterable contempt. “Coat!” And he would
repeat the word softly until, you understand, he had grasped the
enormous idea, when he would say softly, savagely: “What the hell d’you
mean, ‘coat’?” and away he would go, towards that terrible and nameless
penance of his.

Well, the flourish goes, the gesture is gone, to the limbo that yawns
for all such vanities in the very second of their birth. The Cavalier
of Low Creatures was never, to be sure, hailed as more than a zero. But,
even as the ground is not the limit of a man’s fall, as you may see in
the picture with the trail of flame, so zero is not the limit of a man’s
nothingness; for what is that which is nothing but so completely nothing
that it may not have even the mark of nothing? It is, to be sure, zero
without the formative circle round it.

That solitary drunkard, that soiled ascetic! Those nightmare women, soft
as the grass of Parnassus, marvellously acquiescent, possible.
Aphrodite, Ariadne, Anaïtis, white as marble, silent as marble, silent
and acquiescent, possible, as only goddesses could be, the goddesses of
soiled dreams, as no woman born of woman could ever be....

And yet one might have been wrong in imagining the malcontents of the
solitary drunkard’s mind. God only knows, of course, with what nightmare
fancies the man plagued himself. Boys have them, and grow out of them;
men, at least, do not admit even to themselves that they have not grown
out of them, men do not admit even to themselves that while they indulge
in continence they may suddenly find themselves stumbling in the burning
darkness among the vile rubbish-heaps of desire.

That women walked in all the delicious beauty of the unattainable
through Gerald’s tortured mind, I know now. But I did not know it then,
for never was a man so secret with another man as Gerald, never was a
man so little given to discussing with another those inevitable matters
of desire and concupiscence which only by being discussed can be seen in
a proper and proportionate light. They should be aired, those secret
silly things, that they may be seen for what they are. In the old days
there was a god in a garden, and people would do their best to make
pretty fancies out of their lusts, naming them to gods, satyrs, fawns,
nymphs, sirens, sylphs; they, at least, got rid of them somehow. But now
that we see them plainly for what they are, the nasty little enemies of
our assault on nobility, a conspiracy founded by Saint Paul has smashed
the god in the garden and hidden the pieces under the bed.

Gerald, who never spoke but he swore, was the cleanest-mouthed man I
ever met with; while from his book one had gathered that there was one
main idea in Gerald’s mind; this was purity. It was to do with that one
brilliant-childish romance of his that, about seven years before the
coming of the green hat, I had first met Gerald. Then, for more than
five years, I had not seen nor heard of him, had forgotten him, when one
day a lean, dangerous hawk of a young man coming out of the Hammam Baths
in Jermyn Street suddenly stopped me. I knew later that he must have
been in an agony of shyness, but at the time he merely looked intensely
furious. I, not recognising him, thought he was going to hit me, and
gaped at him.

Bitterly and darkly he told me that some one had told him there was a
flat to be let above me in Shepherd’s Market. “I’m staying here at the
moment,” he muttered, looking indignantly at the Hammam Baths. Several
minutes passed before I could place him, for he had been in uniform that
first time, in that transfiguring long-waisted grey coat of the Brigade
of Guards.

Gerald appeared suddenly, in the winter of 1915, at the office of
Horton’s _New Voice_. Now that Horton has left England on his adventure
in un-individualism one does not hear much of _The New Voice_, but at
that time and for long before _The New Voice_ was, of course, a power,
and Horton was a Power. Quite apart from Horton’s personal quality, you
knew he was a Power because several of the greatest of the intelligent
writers of our time kept on bitterly pointing out to their million
readers what a futile man Horton was. Quite a number of the men whose
names you can “conjure with” now--it would be fun to meet that man who
is always in the street conjuring with names!--had begun by writing for
Horton’s paper; but they had always gotten on his nerves by the time
they had become the greatest of the intelligent writers of our time,
and, since Horton was an honest man, he told them so, and he told them
why, and he told them off, and they were furious. But the most inspired
among the greatest of the intelligent writers of our time revenged
themselves by republishing their _New Voice_ stuff in book-form and
omitting to mention _The New Voice_ as the first medium of publication.
That was discourteous of them.

We were correcting proofs when Gerald appeared. It was a Monday
afternoon, and on Monday afternoons any of Horton’s writers who wished
could turn up and correct either his own or some one else’s proofs and
then go and have tea at the A.B.C. And Talk.

“Hello!” said Horton. “Hel_lo_!”

“Defence of the Realm,” murmured Home.

We were not prepared for Gerald. We had, of course, seen soldiers
before; indeed, there was one in the room at the moment, the philosopher
Home, who was to be killed a year or so later. But Gerald was a Figure,
he was martial. The herald of the dominion of hell upon earth, that was
Gerald. Take one small, frowsty room, the staff (Miss Veale) addressing
wrappers at a desk by the window, Horton blue-pencilling at the other
desk by the door, four of us sitting cramped round correcting proofs on
bound annuals of _The New Voice_ on our knees, smoking, muttering--enter
six-foot-two of the Brigade of Guards with a face as dark as night and
the nose of a hawk and the eyes of one who has seen Christ crucified in
vain. The panoply of war sat superbly on Gerald. He looked a soldier in
the real rather than in the technical sense of the word: he looked, you
know, as though he had accepted death and was just living anyhow in the
meanwhile. Ah, see him then! Not even Gerald’s malevolent slackness in
attire could make that long-waisted grey coat with the red-silk lining
sit on him but imperially. Not Gerald’s the common-or-garden chubby face
of a Guard’s subaltern. Gerald was no chap. He glowered at us.

“Eh,” he stammered. “I say ... I’ve been told you people....”

“He’s heard about us,” said Home sympathetically. “Sit down, boy. On the
floor, I’m afraid.”

Gerald began a fierce scowl at him--then grinned. Dear Gerald!

“Well?” smiled Horton. Always courteous was Horton, in manner.

“Heard,” muttered Gerald, “that you didn’t care what you published....”

“Oh!” said Horton. “Well, we don’t care how good it is, if that’s what
you mean.”

You couldn’t guess that Gerald was so shy that he could scarcely speak.
You thought he stammered just because he stammered, not because he was
so shy that he could scarcely get a word out. A man had no right to look
like Gerald, an ensign of the fallen Prince of Light, and be shy; but
that was always Gerald’s trouble, he never was given the credit for
being shy, he put himself between you and any sympathy with him, he made
it clear that he didn’t want your infernal sympathy. Just then, for
instance, he looked as though he had strayed into _The New Voice_ to
send us all to blazes on general principles. And Horton looked as though
he was quite prepared to go. Horton preferred bad-tempered men.

“There’s this,” Gerald muttered, and lugged out an enormous typescript
from the deep pocket of his grey coat. “Novel,” he scowled at Horton.
“Thought perhaps....” and he planted the thing with a thump on Horton’s
desk. Horton grinned. Horton had had much too much to do with
professional novelists to think that a novel by a subaltern of
Grenadiers was necessarily unreadable. “Bit long, isn’t it?” he smiled.

“Long?” Gerald stammered. “Of course it’s long! Been writing it for four
whole months.”

“Ought to be good,” said Home gravely.

“It’s _awful_,” grinned Gerald, “but, you see....”

“Quite,” said Horton busily. “Now, I’ll....”

“Hello!” said Horton, for Gerald was not. Horton threw the typescript to
me to read. Of course, it was mad. _The New Voice_ published most of it,
and then Heinemann’s published it in the autumn of 1916 and ran it into
three editions while people were still disentangling their eyes from the
paper wrapper, which showed a woman with purple eyes crucifying a
pleasant young man.

_The Savage Device_ is open before me as I write, and its opening lines
are: “The history of Felix Burton is the history of an ideal and a
vision. They had nothing to do with one another except that the pursuit
of the vision hardened him and blooded him for the attainment of the
ideal. The ideal was aristocratic, in the sense that it was a striving
after nobility in life: the vision was a contradiction, as scientific as
it was mystic. The ideal was, of course, defeated: the vision, of
course, defeated him. The ideal was purity: the vision had something to
do with pain....”

The “vision,” so far as one could see, had everything to do with pain;
in fact it was pain, and the vision might or might not come afterwards.
(And I detest that word “mystic.”) The book was exciting and interesting
because of a strange mixture of high romance, desperate villainy and an
abysmal bitterness. The war came in, naturally. Gerald’s hero had
minority ideas about the war--letting the landed gentry down again! As
for the pain ... Young Burton’s idea of it had not to do with pain as a
fact, but as the most sublime among drugs. You know? “In fact,” Gerald
wrote, “it is the only drug that cannot debase a man. It can kill him,
but there are worse ways of dying than being killed.” It was full of
quotations like that, but Gerald threw them at you with a dash sadly
lacking in the originals. Young Burton was, of course, going to die in
the war.

Young Burton, it appeared, had studied the major and minor tortures of
crime and martyrdom. There was a long description of tortures, if you
liked that kind of thing. I have seen Gerald’s books on them, with
illustrations ... very interesting. Then young Burton had come across
the old, old idea that after a certain limit of pain there is a definite
state of bliss and definite and glorious visions of a real reality which
men by ordinary are too sodden or too timorous to see. But poor old
Gerald, try as he would, couldn’t make _The Savage Device_ a novel of
ideas: it remained a novel of adventure, with an inhuman interest. Young
Burton went everywhere in the world, having adventures, getting
magnificently hurt--South Sea stuff--studying the effect of pain on
men’s minds. A Chinese bandit helped him to quite a number of visions.

Then he plucked Ava Foe from a “dive” in San Francisco, she became Mrs.
Burton, and then he had every opportunity for judging the visionary
qualities of mental pain. That part was fiendishly well written, the
hell that Ava Burton gave him. But young Burton’s ideal of purity was,
naturally enough, schoolboy stuff: fine in parts, but stuff. The only
part of it that was good was that it was, somehow, purity. On the sexual
side young Burton deserved almost all he got from his, one thought,
unnecessarily callous young wife. In Ava Foe, I couldn’t help thinking
after the coming of the green hat, Gerald had let himself go about Iris.
I realised then how he must first have worshipped and then hated his
twin sister. What on earth, one wondered, could she have done to him to
make him hate her like that? Ava wasn’t in the least like her, of
course, but Ava might quite well have been like any sister to any
brother who hated her. But this fierce, devilish, mediæval passion--why?
Yet I should have guessed something of the reason after Iris had told me
that young Burton was “Boy,” Gerald’s hero of before the war. But it
never occurred to me to connect Iris’s casually dropped “Boy” with the
legendary Boy Fenwick of Careless-Days-Before-the-War fame. He will have
his place, that dead Boy Fenwick. A deep place.

“Felix Burton’s” idea of what a man should be to live nobly--he was full
of those large strivings of Young Men which were in vogue in the
Careless-Days-Before-the-War--seemed to take the form of wanting to
found a new race of something like potent eunuchs. Young Burton was, of
course, without the lusts of the body. Ava Foe wasn’t. Nor did young
Burton want any of your waste of time in graceful love-making; he
wanted a sort of ruthless companionship, with occasional patches of
mating; he did _not_ want to procreate gracefully, but with a sort of
furious absent-mindedness. Imagine Ava--Iris! Imagine Gerald himself
drawing the woman of his nightmares, that soft possible woman of lonely
dreams, detesting her for destroying him ... and for destroying Boy! One
wondered, in reading, if Gerald had ever known a woman. The dark knight
of purity ... the fallen knight of purity, but how fallen!


III

I did not see Gerald whilst I was shaking the dust of Shepherd’s Market
for ever off my feet, for he was still asleep. I left Shepherd’s Market.
The hearty-looking man and the thin wizened man who said “Oi!” and the
little bent old man with the blood-shot eyes gave me farewell.

That afternoon I snatched a few moments from the arranging of the new
place, which was only round the corner, to go round and tell Gerald that
his sister had been to see him on an Impulse. I had grown to feel
responsible for Gerald: his solitude was somehow like a scar across
one’s own life, a rebuke.

I came upon him in our lane. I have forgotten to say that Gerald, after
a particularly hard spell of dipsomania, would go riding on a hack from
the Mews nearby. He had a pair of fine polo breeches with which to do
that, and with the fine polo breeches (Moss Bros.) went Barty March’s
riding-whip and the jacket of the old grey suit and that hat. A
highwayman on an off day, that is what he looked like in the mean lane,
passing the time of day with the little bent old man with the blood-shot
eyes.

“You’ve been drinking,” said Gerald severely to me.

“Billy Goat’s won the two-thirty,” wheezed the little bent old man. His
hat was the captain of Gerald’s hat.

One didn’t, perhaps, look one’s best in the middle of a removal. But
Gerald, confound the man, looked positively healthy, taut, tempered,
weathered. _Ach, le sale type anglais!_ I told him that his sister had
called. “On an Impulse,” I said.

Gerald stared at me, his cigarette half-way to his mouth. “Oh!” he said.
“Oh!...”

“Here’s her telephone number,” I said. He didn’t take the slip of paper
I held out.

“’Ere,” said the little bent old man, “I’ll give it ’im when he’s
better.” Gerald lowered his cigarette, scowling at me pathetically. No
one else would have known it was “pathetically.”

“Iris called hell!” he accused me. “How you lie! What?”

“Honest to God, Gerald!”

He flipped away his cigarette and dug his free hand into his pocket as
though it was a weapon. Those deep eyes scowled at me, but I wondered
what they saw.

“That beast,” he whispered, “oh, that beast....”

I left him.

And I did not see him again until the twelfth evening later. I wish I
had. I ought to have been to see him, for I was in the habit of seeing
Gerald, and during those twelve days he might, I think he would, have
told me about the silly, shoddy thing that had happened, and I could
have helped to make him see it as only a silly, shoddy thing. What made
me feel responsible for Gerald was that his livid, unreasonable,
childish contempt for all accepted things was not contempt at all, but
fear, just plain fear. He was, I mean, so afraid of life that he simply
couldn’t exist but by pretending to despise it. Piercing that tortured
vanity, I felt that life was a huge hungry beast ready to maul Gerald if
he so much as tried to placate it--by using, say, a little pumice-stone
on his fingers. And one could never, after having seen through his
furious _blague_, be rid of an acute sense of the shamefaced
childishness in the man, a childishness beaten down, gone crooked, which
could only do him a hurt if it was not watched. And one didn’t, quite
definitely didn’t, want Gerald to be hurt more than he already hurt
himself by just breathing.

But, whether it was because that involuntary whisper of his about his
sister had sickened me even more than I had thought at the moment, or
whether it was merely because I was too busy with arranging myself into
the new place, I simply did not seem to have the time to look him up
during those twelve days. I wish I had.

Nor, during those twelve days, would it have come very amiss to talk a
little about Mrs. Storm. One would have liked to know just a little of
the history of that shameless, shameful lady. After all, one didn’t
every day meet a woman with a pagan body and a Chislehurst mind. But
naturally neither Guy nor Hilary was available during those twelve days,
for that is a way friends have; Guy because he was down at Mace with the
May-fly, and Hilary just because he was tiresome. Hilary, Guy wrote from
Mace, was helping a Liberal to fight a musty bye-election in some
Staffordshire place. “As if,” Guy wrote, “a Liberal ever won, as if a
Liberal could ever win without a pretty long start! and a handicapper
can never get a grip on anything in a Liberal to give him a start
on--sticky little fellows they are, always sliding away somewhere. And
as if it mattered whether a Liberal did or didn’t win. He’ll only get
squashed with his own petard.” And, however it was, Hilary’s Liberal
didn’t win, so maybe Guy was right. “In ten years’ time,” says Guy,
“Hilary will be the only Liberal left in Parliament, looking happier and
younger and more sickening than ever.”

It was on the fifth morning after the coming and going of the green hat
that I was on an instant afflicted with an impulse, and did on the same
instant act upon it.

“Hello!” I said.

“Hello!” they said. They were a she.

“Could I speak to Mrs. Storm, please?”

“Who is that speaking, please?”

I quibbled quite in vain.

“I will put the name down in her little book,” said the she kindly.

“Thank you,” I tried not to say bitterly. To ring some one up on impulse
and then have your impulse perpetuated in a Little Book!

“Mrs. Storm is not in town,” said the she.

“Oh, I see,” I said. It is a detestable habit some people have of saying
“in town” or “out of town.” What town? There can’t, honestly, be any
real harm in saying London....

“Is there any message? I always take her messages.”

“Oh, no,” I said. “Thank you very much. Good-b----”

“This is Mrs. Oden speaking.”

“Oh,” I said. “Mrs. Oden?”

“Yes?” said Mrs. Oden.

“Well, thank you very much,” I said. “Good-b----”

“She never is, you know,” complained Mrs. Oden. Now that was a
loquacious lady. I do not wish to be belittling any one else, but I am
sure that she talked more in the next few minutes than any other person
of the same chest-expansion in England. She seemed to have been
suffering from silence all that morning until my ring. I learnt later
that Mrs. Oden had once been Iris’s governess, that there was always a
floor reserved for Iris in her house in Montpellier Square, which house
Mr. and Mrs. Oden owed entirely to Iris’s generosity.

“She went off to Paris the other day,” complained Mrs. Oden, “at a
_moment’s_ notice. Here to-day and gone to-morrow. It is too bad of her,
when we never see anything of her. She is too vague, I always tell her.
I suppose she had made some arrangement with you, Mr. er, has forgotten
to put you off, and now you are disappointed?”

“Oh,” I said. “Yes, certainly.”

“Well, I expect her back any day, but how long she will stay this time I
have not the faintest idea. Really it is too bad, she gets vaguer every
year. And here has her aunt Lady Eve Chalice been wanting her address in
Paris, and I have not the faintest idea of anything! What did you say
the name was? Oh, yes, of course, I have it down. She will see it as
_soon_ as she returns, I promise you. Yes, yes. Good-bye, good-bye.”

It was five days later that there came to my hand a large box labelled
from _Edouard Apel et Cie._, _rue de la Paix_, _Paris_ and stamped “By
Air.” Within the large box were several smaller flat boxes, and within
these were reams upon reams of finest white notepaper, but good, manly
stuff, stamped with my new address; and if that notepaper had its way I
never would have another address, for there was enough in those small
flat boxes to last a reasonably reticent man for all time. No note came
with them. I searched. Then, across the top sheet of the third box that
I opened, I found scrawled in pencil in an absurd, schoolgirl hand:
“That one day you may write to me to say that you have forgiven me for
the only dignity I have left: the dignity of the....”

I could not make out that last word for several days. It was scrawled
right across the foot of the sheet, a long squiggle with one eye looking
out from the middle of it which might have been an a. At last I thought
it was “unaware.”

Much later Iris told me that it was “unaware.” She said: “I picked out
the phrase from a book I was reading, and sent it to you like a
flower.”




CHAPTER THREE: FOR PURITY!


I

The cavalier of low creatures dies hard; surviving even our gesture, he
loiters dangerously in the tail of our eye, he awaits, with piratical
calm, the final stroke; and only will he fade and be forever gone,
despised, and distraught, before the face of him who bore the magic
device For Purity, whose ghost was to be raised by Mr. Townshend over
dinner on the twelfth night after the coming of the green hat. For, his
wretched Liberal being at last retrieved from somewhere beneath the foot
of the poll, that gentleman was again among us, saying “hm.”

We have so far seen but the shadow of Mr. Townshend; now, at last, this
shadow must emerge into the tale of the weak Marches as the person of
Mr. Townshend of Magralt. He emerges, as becomes a man of property who
believes in progress as though it were a pain, in a dinner-jacket, _le
smoking_, a Tuxedo; of which the bow-tie is gathered together with that
dexterous carelessness which is the affectation of elderly Englishmen
who cannot put up with any affectations whatever. Now there is no known
explanation for this phenomenon of the sickly bow-tie among Englishmen
of over forty years of age. That they are all blackguards, Mr. Shaw has
assured us. But haven’t they, God bless one’s soul, eyes! It is not, of
course, of the least importance whether a bow-tie falls straight or
crooked, particularly on a grown-up man. It is not, after all, of the
least importance whether one is clothed or naked. But one may, in
passing, be permitted to wonder on the curious dispositions of the blind
goddess Chance, whereby not once in a long lifetime, not even by one
little bit of a fluke, will one of these elderly gentlemen ever tie a
bow to fall even approximately right. They must, therefore, do it on
purpose. But for what purpose? Let them, I say unto them, tie their bows
carefully while the bow-tying is good, for voices from the Clyde are
rising loud and everywhere those snobs are dominant who affect that the
shirt of democracy should be a dishclout.

However, Mr. Townshend’s shadow does not even yet grow in substance
without some difficulty. Between him and us, towards the dinner-hour,
intrudes, knife-like, that deuce of cavaliers, he of the hat that
Frederick the Great would have envied, for that wrecker of homes liked
his hats soft and malleable, he liked to twist and torture them as
though they were no more than men. In fine, Gerald made me late for
dinner.

The clock of the Queen Street Post Office stood at three minutes before
eight o’clock as I passed on my way to Hilary’s house in Chesterfield
Street. The roar of the marching hosts of Piccadilly was as though muted
by the still evening air. The small straight streets of Mayfair lay as
though musing between the setting of the sun and the rising of the
theatre-curtain. Neat errand-boys, released for the day, kicked their
heels about on the curbs. The drivers of the sauntering taxi-cabs looked
inquiringly, impersonally, into the faces of hurrying pedestrians.
Limousines lounged softly by. Past me strode intently a tall
raven-haired woman in a bright green wrap with a high sable collar, and
moving frantically below were bright green shoes and bright green
stockings that appalled the suave dignity of the evening light. These
are not the only green properties we shall see in this tale, for women
of the mode wore very much of green in the year 1922; although, of
course, some women were not necessarily of the mode even when they wore
green. Some women should not wear green. To such, their husbands should
say: “My dear, I can’t help saying it again, but really I’ve never seen
you look as well as when you’re in black.”

It was from the Curzon Street corner, just by Jolley’s the chemist, that
I saw Gerald. He was across the road, against the entrance of the little
tunnel that leads into Shepherd’s Market, buying an evening-paper off a
friend of ours, Mr. Auk, who used to have his stand just there.

I crossed towards Gerald. I would be a few minutes late for dinner, that
was certain, but if ever I was punctual at Hilary’s he never was
dressed: a sense of conduct being the property of imperious men, who
must disregard the servile virtue of punctuality.

I could not see Gerald’s face as he stood on the curb glancing at his
paper, the brim of that hat was so low over his right eye. Mr. Auk
winked at me as I came up. “Oiled, that’s wot!” whispered Mr. Auk. Then
a friend of his came by and he and Mr. Auk retreated into the tunnel,
where I vaguely thought that Mr. Auk seemed to be telling his friend
something funny about Gerald. I never have passed the time of day with
Mr. Auk since I found what it was that he thought so funny about Gerald
that evening.

When I greeted Gerald he instantly looked up from the paper to me. I
remember now that he seemed to watch my face for something, an
expression, which he half-expected to see. But one notices those things
only later on.

“I say, seen the evening-paper?”

“No. Why?”

The dark eyes haunted with abstraction, the thin hawk’s nose, the fine,
twisted, defiant mouth....

“Why? How the hell do I know why!”

He crumpled his paper, thrust it under his arm and dug the released hand
into his pocket. Thus was Gerald Haveleur March armed cap-a-pie against
life. He had something on his mind, one could see that. But it would
take hours to make Gerald confide anything.

“I say, have a drink?”

Now I wonder how many thousands of men are at this very moment putting
that question to thousands of men; yet that, if nothing else, would have
made that night significant in my life, for never before had the
solitary asked me or, I think, any one to have a drink with him. Nor
would he, as a rule, have a drink if you suggested it. And once, at a
party I gave, he had some gingerbeer. But, even so, I had to say I
couldn’t, pleading that I would be too late for dinner. “With Hilary,” I
said, and he scowled absently in a way he had, and lounged up the road
with me. Thoughtful he was always.

That was a curious, capacious evening. The Marches were gathered
together that evening, they who were never let off anything. As Gerald
lounged beside me the great primrose car with the menacing shining
bonnet passed us as silently as though Curzon Street was a carpet. It
was empty but for a boyish chauffeur. Gerald, I suppose, did not know
it, and I did not remark on it. I wondered if Iris had surprised Mrs.
Oden by returning suddenly. Poor Mr. Oden....

“What have you been doing with yourself lately, Gerald?”

“Doing?” His eyes pierced the pavement the other side of my shoulder,
for tall was Gerald.

He grinned....

“You’d never guess,” he grinned.

I did not like this grinning. It was unusual in Gerald. It was like a
crooked mask on the fine dark face. There was by ordinary no grinning
froth about Gerald ... and, somehow, it crossed my mind that maybe
Gerald was hard-up. I asked him, oh, tentatively, if anything was “up.”

“Up? The hell’s up. O Jesu!” And he grinned....

“Yes, but besides that--anything?” Not, you know, that I thought for one
moment that anything really was “up.” It was merely that I misliked that
grinning.

I can see him this moment so clearly, the way he suddenly threw back
his head and stared from under the brim of that hat as though into the
heart of the heavens: the dark, defiant, hungry silhouette searching the
heart of the above.

We were at the corner of East Chapel Street, where the great American
pile of Sunderland House debases itself before the puny roofs of
Mayfair: it loitered clumsily against the soft evening light, reluctant
to yield to the grey embrace of London....

“God!” sighed Gerald. Like a child, like a child ... and like a fiend he
suddenly laughed up at the veiled heavens. “Imagine, you fool, just
imagine the bloody degradation of being alive!”

But I will leave out Gerald’s “bloody’s.” One is tired of saying,
hearing, reading that silly word. It is only chickenfood, after all, and
does very well on the lips of the young ladies of the day, but there is
no reason why grown-up people should use it.

“I like you,” he said, as only that devilish child could say it. “You
sit on your imagination as though it was an egg, and a nice little
chicken comes out. God, I wouldn’t be you! Look at all the pretty eggs
you’ll hatch and not one have a chance to grow up into a splendid,
lovely old hen that’ll peck at the dung you call life. Why don’t you
write about fallen archangels? They’re the only things worth writing
about, fallen archangels. Phut to you, that’s what I say....”

I managed then, for the first time in our friendship, to suggest that if
perhaps he was hard-up, well, phut to him....

“Look here, that’s not fair,” stammered Gerald. Shy himself, he made one
want to sink into the ground with shyness. “I mean, that’s putting
friendship to music, isn’t it? What?”

“Oh, nonsense, Gerald! There’s nothing so silly and mean as this
reticence about money....”

“God, but you’ve given me an idea. I’ll tell you what I’ll do for you,
as you’re late for dinner. I’ll damn well lend you a fiver.”

“But, Gerald----”

“You talk too much,” Gerald stammered. “I’d like to do you a bit of
good. And I’ve still got to thank you for chloroforming me and lugging
me off to that Home for Drunks, thanks very much. Now, am I going to
lend you a fiver or am I going to make such a rough-house just here that
all the police in London will come and arrest you for soliciting? I’ll
scream if you don’t touch me!”

I was in a hurry. I had to take that fiver. I have that fiver still.

“I’ll keep it for you,” I said. “Damn you.”

“Yes, you keep it for me,” said Gerald thoughtfully. “Nice, fivers are
...” and then, savagely muttering “Oh, hell!” he strode abruptly away
down the slope of East Chapel Street, which leads into Shepherd’s
Market. Drunk or sober, you simply couldn’t tell. You never knew that
man was drunk until he was speechless. I was hurrying away when his
voice held me--and a very boyish voice Gerald had, like a prefect’s at
school.

“I say, seen that sister of mine again?... You haven’t?” He seemed to
reflect profoundly. “I say, if ever you do, give her my love. What? I
say, don’t forget....”

“I won’t forget,” I called back. “Good-night, Gerald.” But he had turned
away, and the last I saw of him he was putting his shoulder against the
saloon-door of The Leather Butler. I plunged across the road to
Chesterfield Street, glad of the message I would certainly give to
Gerald’s sister. Maybe to-night, somehow. A furious conference of livid
pink and purple monsters hung over Seamore Place, where the sun was
sinking into Kensington Gardens.


II

“There was a cocktail for you,” said Hilary gloomily, “but I drank it,
in case it grew warm.” I thanked him politely for the idea. “It wasn’t
an idea, really,” said Hilary gloomily. “It was an impulse.”

It is not, therefore, impossible to understand how it came about that
there were not a few people, youngish people, who considered Mr.
Townshend to be a tiresome man. They said: “He is very nice, but
_frankly_, isn’t he rather tiresome?” I supposed he was rather tiresome.

Hilary was a man of various ages; when nothing was going well with him,
he would look no more than forty; when everything was going well with
him, he would look about forty-five; when he was crossing a road, that
is to say when he was thinking, he looked about fifty. This last was, I
believe, his age.

Hilary was a man who had convinced himself and every one else that he
had neither use nor time for the flibberty-gibberties of life. He
collected postage-stamps and had sat as Liberal Member for an Essex
constituency for fifteen years. To be a Liberal was against every one of
his prejudices, but to be a Conservative was against all his
convictions. He thought of democracy as a drain-pipe through which the
world must crawl for its health. He did not think the health of the
world would ever be good. When travelling he looked porters sternly in
the face and over-tipped them. His eyes were grey and gentle, and they
were suspicious of being amused. I think that Hilary treasured a belief
that his eyes were cold and ironic, as also that his face was of a stern
cast. His face was long, and the features somehow muddled. It was a kind
face.

Hilary is the last in direct line of the Townshends, who have held
Magralt, a Tudor manor on the Essex coast, since a Townshend deserted to
Henry Tudor on Bosworth Field. The Townshends of Magralt have always
been soldiers, “and that,” Guy, first and last, a soldier, will say, “is
the only reason one can see why Hilary is a politician by profession and
the foremost stamp-collector in Chesterfield Street by the sweat of his
brow.” But one has to report that Hilary was once, before witnesses,
perfectly beastly to an American gentleman who said that Blucher had
arrived in time for the Battle of Waterloo.

But it was on the question of marriage that the two friends would
indulge the sharpest difference of opinion; or rather, Hilary’s wasn’t
an opinion, it was a lurking Silence.

“Suppose you die,” said Guy de Travest. “You might. You are ten years
older than me in years alone. You may receive your call to higher things
at any moment. Look how I beat you at squash the other day! Let us
suppose, then, that you are as good as dead. Unmarried, childless. You
have done nothing. You are nothing. You leave nothing. Except, of
course, what was left to you----”

“Less,” said Hilary.

“Your memory, then, goes down as that of a sickening philatelist.
Whereas, had any one of your ancestors had a chance of a bit of war like
ours, he would have died a Major-General!”

“A Field-Marshal, Guy. You forget that the Townshends have the
reputation of having lost more of their soldiers’ lives than any other
service-family in England.” And so it would go on for ever, Guy
contending that as Hilary was nothing in himself it was disloyal of him
not to wed and bring forth direct heirs, while Hilary’s attitude would
be one of benevolently beckoning to the sombre heights of Cumberland,
where sat the house of Curle-Townshend, heirs-apparent to Magralt and
all its fiefs.

Any one, as Hilary was once goaded into muttering, would have thought
that Guy’s own marriage was the happiest in the world; at worst, any one
might have thought that it was a happy marriage, as marriages go. Guy,
it was said, adored his wife. Guy, it was said, never spoke to his wife
except in public and as he passed through her room in the morning
towards his bath, when he said “Good-morning.” It was Lady de Travest
who volunteered this information. “I do not see,” said Lady de Travest
in her slow soft voice, “why one should for ever conceal the fact that
one’s husband is cruel to one. It is nothing for one to be ashamed of,
is it?” Moira de Travest was a quiet woman, with slow graces of
movement, statuesque, exceedingly handsome in what you might call a
public way, with a dark, restrained smile in the blue eyes under the
hair that shone like black silver. Suddenly she would give a very loud
laugh, and then her eyes would shine boyishly for a second. She had many
intimate friends among women, and at times she was rather brilliant in a
man-like way. Foreign Ambassadors liked to be with her. Mr. de Laszlo,
M.V.O., painted her. Women novelists had tea with her. Twice a year she
would say that a day must come when she must take a lover, but she gave
one a profound sense that there was nothing in the world she could
endure less. But, whatever it was that had gone wrong between those two
ten years before, they had a son, a boy of sixteen, at Eton, and Guy de
Travest would remain by his marriage without question of separation or
divorce. That was cruel of him, Moira’s friends said, but Guy was a very
catholic gentleman, and he loved his son beyond all things. In the
earlier pages of country house albums one might come on photographs of
Guy and Moira arm-in-arm, yellow Viking and black silver. They did not
seem to have aged at all since then, but maybe Lady de Travest was a
little more statuesque and her eyes would shine more and more boyishly.

Hilary and Guy were friends. Inseparable, they were inimical. They
agreed on nothing, nor had they one taste in common. But maybe it is in
a similar tempering of a sense of conduct that Englishmen, regardless of
all overt differences, will find their deepest friendships. Conduct was
for Guy and Hilary one of three facts, the other two being birth and
death. And it is they and their opposites who must finally make the
storms of life. Warriors of conduct and enemies of conduct--there is the
issue that has still to find its final battlefield. Hilary’s Liberalism,
in that issue, would come crashing about his heart; of his head he would
take no account, for it is not by the head that one decides in ultimate
moments. Guy, tall as a tree, Guy the latter-day “thunder-god of
dandies,” would make a flaming figure, standing against the afterglow of
the fires of an old religion called aristocracy. But Guy was far from
being of those Tories, of whom Mr. Galsworthy has written with such
cruel sympathy in _Fraternity_ and _The Patrician_, who are obsessed by
an illusion of their own exclusive right to national captaincy. Guy did
not think that the hope for England or the world lay in himself or his
caste. He was not a clever man; but his contempt for politics was born
of a conviction that there was no hope of curing the diseases of life
and society by anything that any body of men could do. Men individually
must clean themselves within, questing for and grasping what cleanness
there was in them. There was a frozen storm in Guy’s eyes, and they were
very clean. But, of course, he was not very clever.

Those two men are for me symbols of an England that I love. I am not
sure that I can explain what that England is. I am not sure that I would
like to explain it even to myself, as, maybe for the same reason, I
would not like to read Jane Austen with a mental measure. I am not sure
that there ever was such an England. The soil, to be sure, is there, the
clouds across the sun, the teasing humours of the island seasons: the
halls, the parklands, the spacious rooms, they are there. But the
figures that sweep across them--are these that we see, all? Are there no
others, lost somewhere, calmly ready to show themselves--are these that
we see, all? These healthy, high-busted women with muscles like those of
minotaurs, these girls who are either stunned with health or pale with
the common vapours of common dancing-halls, these stout, graceless ones
here, those too slender, bloodless ones there, these things that have no
voice between a shout and a whisper, these things that have yielded to
democracy nothing but their dignity--are these that we see, all? These
rather caddish young men who have no vision between a pimply purity and
vice, who are without the grace with which to adorn ignorance or the
learning with which to make vulgarity tolerable, these peasant-minded
noblewomen, these matrons who appear to have gained in youth what they
have lost in dignity, these toiling dancers, these elderly gentlemen
with their ungallant vices--are these that we see, all? Or was there
never such an England? Were the parklands and the spacious rooms never
peopled but by nincompoops let loose by wealth among the graces of
learning and fashion? Was there never such an England as I myself once
saw in the magic of a spring morning in London? It was no more than the
passing picture of Guy de Travest walking by the sulky side of
Piccadilly, as he must always do to pass between his house in Belgrave
Square to his club in Saint James’s Street, to which a few gentlemen
will still absently resort. I saw Guy walking against the broken
sunlight of the Green Park, and then I did not see Guy. It was as though
from one step to another he had walked into a dimension wherein the
desires of his heart melted his person into the England of his heart,
and he was rendered invisible in the ambience of the Green Park and
against the ancient landscape of Saint James’s.


III

Hilary says that I was very quiet over dinner that night. He remarked
it, he says, because it was so unusual. Hilary has an illusion common to
Englishmen, that if a man can utter three consecutive sentences without
breaking them up with “eh,” “ah,” “hm,” “mm,” and any other noises that
may occur to him as fit and proper, he must be held to be talking too
much.

How on earth, I was wondering, could I cast the name of Mrs. Storm
before my host with even a tolerable hope of his more than grunting at
it? For, of course, one never discussed women with Hilary. I believe he
had been a member of several clubs once upon a time, but in these
degenerate days he had finally withdrawn into the impenetrable fortress
of the Marlborough; Guy and he agreeing that, since it was once said of
a King of Spain that he had died of etiquette, they envied rather than
cared to overlook their young friends in the exercise of the long lives
assured to them.

“He will, if you provoke him,” Iris had said, absently enough. And,
indeed, never but once had I ever heard Hilary expand at the mention of
a woman’s name, and that was when I had provoked him by defending her,
the lady in question being one for whom he had a great regard but who
had, as they say very aptly in the popular phrase, “gone completely off
the rails.” As regards Iris, in that case, it should be child’s work.

Hilary says now that he was able, so soon as I mentioned her name, to
account for my subdued air. Such, Hilary says, was the aftermath of
Iris’s effect on men. But all he said at the time was, snappy like, that
he hadn’t even known she was in London and would I have port or brandy
or both, because I was detaining them at my side of the table? I said I
was sorry and how amiable Mrs. Storm had been about him. “And fancy,” I
said, “her being Gerald’s twin sister!”

“Why ‘fancy’?”

Hilary was annoyed. Now why was Hilary annoyed? Why do men get annoyed?

“She is beautiful,” I said, “she is good, she is----”

“It seems to me,” snapped Hilary, “that they make a perfectly harmonious
pair of twins. Hm.” And he lit a cigar and reflected profoundly on the
flame of the match. Perhaps I had better leave out his “hm’s.”

“There’s only one March,” he said, pushing a cup of coffee towards me as
though he hated the sight of it, “who has ever been any good, and that’s
the aunt, Eve Chalice, a dear old lady. Heavens above, the March blood!
But they will be near their last gasp now, with young Gerald as the
heir....”

It just showed, you know, how much one ever knew about that young man. I
had no idea he was heir to anything, let alone the bankrupt earldom.
“Ever since last July,” said Hilary, “when his uncle, Barty’s elder
brother by a year, and his cousin thought they would do some fifth-rate
mountaineering in Switzerland without a guide, and tried by mistake to
climb the Jungfrau.” Hilary, I remember thinking, seemed very bitter
about that mountaineering. You know, that bitterness of a calm, normal,
reasonable air, with a slight flavour of old-world banter? He seemed to
want to give the impression that he rather gloated than otherwise over
the decline and fall of the house of Portairley. Gerald, as the
nineteenth earl, Hilary seemed to want to say, served the house of
Portairley right. If Hilary could only have seen his own kind grey eyes!

But that something, apart from the mere existence of the Marches, had
annoyed him, was obvious; and presently I realised that the something
was the fact that Iris had not let him know she was in London, but that
he had heard of it from me, from any one, in fact, but herself. I ought
instantly to have guessed that was the matter, Hilary being one of
those detached men who have no use for the flibberty-gibberties of life.

Gerald, one thought, would make about as pretty an Earl of Portairley
and Axe as even the Marches could boast. “But at least,” I suggested,
“he will have a little more money than he has now?”

“About,” said Hilary, “minus five hundred a year. They can’t even bribe
any one to take Portairley, and so the old gentleman has to live in a
couple of rooms and pay the taxes on the property from what his
creditors allow him. That old curse working, one would think....”

There isn’t really a great variety among these family curses. There
appear to be no more than two schools of thought among the cursers, one
which consigns the cursed to instant death, and the other to prolonged
disgrace ending in damnation. The Portairley’s curse was of the second
variety, and poor Gerald appeared to be in at the death for the
damnation.

“Vaguely,” I said, “I gather that Gerald and his sister had some quarrel
in the distant past. But I happened to see Gerald as I came on here, and
he seemed ready for a reconciliation. In that case, as Mrs. Storm seems
to be wealthy....”

Certainly Hilary could surprise one. He exploded, in that quiet
parliamentary way which is one of the loftiest dignities of a
constitutional country: “And thank the Lord she is! Imagine the shoddy
life of an Iris--with neither money nor morals!”

Evidently, then, Hilary had a great regard for the lady of the green
hat. You must remember that until this evening not so much as her name
had passed between us.... “He will, if you provoke him,” Iris had said.
Well, hadn’t I!

Hector Storm V.C. had, it seemed, left her every penny. Storm, steel,
Sheffield. “Fine boy, Storm,” said Hilary, pulling at a stiff grey thing
which I forgot to mention he wore on his upper lip without, however,
succeeding in looking anything but clean-shaven. “Boy Fenwick left her
all he had too, but she wouldn’t, naturally, touch a penny of it. You
would think the world was upside down when you came to inquire into the
moral sense of an Iris! Strict as steel here, unbending as iron
there--and then! She gave all Boy Fenwick’s fortune over to old Aunt
Fenwick, since when the old hag has called Iris every name out of the
Apocrypha for her pains.”

“But, Hilary!” I said. Hilary says now that I was white in the face.
“But did you say Boy Fenwick? Boy ... Fenwick?”

“Her first husband,” said Hilary; and he pushed his port-glass an inch
or two up the polished surface of the table and stared at it. “You
couldn’t,” he said, “do better than young Fenwick.... But before your
time, I suppose....”

“I never dreamt,” I think I said, “that Mrs. Storm had been the Mrs.
Fenwick....”

“Mrs. Storm,” smiled Hilary queerly to his port-glass, “has been
everything.”

But Boy Fenwick! And the shameless, shameful lady of the green hat as
the tragic Mrs. Fenwick! So there was “Felix Burton” and his ideal of
purity! And there, plain as hate could make her, there was “Ava Foe,”
and somewhere there was the reason for Gerald’s mediæval hatred for his
sister! Somewhere there, but exactly where? For no one knew less of Boy
Fenwick’s death than I did, that being a legend of “a little before my
time....”

“I knew Iris,” Hilary was saying thoughtfully, playing with the stem of
his glass, “when she was so high. They had a house in Cambridge Square
then, and she used to go to that school in South Audley Street where
they all go to. I’d see her walking along with her governess, a long
little thing, all brown stockings and blue eyes. Hm. She was adorable.”

There was a pause ... and suddenly he turned his face to me, that long,
thin, grey-looking face with the kind, muddled features. And it was as
though it had, suddenly, profoundly lost all its inner calm. Hilary’s
outward calm, in spite of his detached air--“Mr. Townshend, the
imperturbable champion of procedure”--was always rather like a Gruyère
cheese, a sort of smooth surface with gaps. But this was different, this
was as though a tap had been wrenched loose inside him, letting run a
savage, hurt bewilderment which didn’t quite reach his skin. “And now,”
he said softly, yet looking at me as though accusing _me_ of something.
“And now! The last I heard of Iris was that she was seen night after
night in a Russian cabaret in Vienna with an Italian Jew who is said to
have made a fortune by exporting medicated champagne to America. There’s
the long little thing, all brown stockings and blue eyes....”

“But,” I began, and decided that it was better not. But it was absurd,
that “night after night.” That wasn’t, I knew, Iris Storm. Not “night
after night.” She might very possibly have sat one night in a Russian
cabaret in Vienna with an Italian Jew who exported medicated champagne
to America, but certainly not “night after night.” Unless, that is, she
had changed a great deal since then. After all, one couldn’t be more
unattractive than an Italian Jew who exported medicated champagne to
America. No, really, that was too much.

“Your generation,” said Hilary thoughtfully, “is a mess. Have some
brandy?”

“It’s absurd,” I said, “to talk ‘generations.’ Slack novelists do it to
get easy effects. All generations are a mess. Thank you.”

“Your generation,” said Hilary thoughtfully, “has more opportunities for
being a mess than ours had. That’s what I meant. And your children will
have more opportunities than you have. There is a certain amount of
horse-sense in the reluctance of many young fellows nowadays to having
wives of their own. They’re afraid of getting it in the neck from the
results. For whereas you have motors and telephones and wireless with
which to lose your sense of the stabilities, as you are losing them,
they will have cheap aeroplanes as well. When you people nowadays begin
to break loose there’s no limit to your looseness. There was in my
father’s time. They couldn’t get about so quickly. They couldn’t grub
about in so many cesspools at one time, rushing in a night between
London and any vile paradise of the vulgarities like Deauville or the
present Riviera. Even if they broke loose a little--the women, I
mean--they generally had to make some compromise with the decencies
simply because they had to live in the place, they couldn’t make an
appointment with a trunk-call to Paris and go and have a few days’ ‘fun’
there. But now if a woman has kicked through every restraint of caste
and chastity there’s the whole world open for her to play the mischief
in, there’s every invention in the world to help her indulge her
intolerable little lusts....”

I mastered an irrational impulse to try to defend Iris against the
friend of her childhood. I would have liked to say that the little lusts
were intolerable most of all to Iris. Hilary would almost have
sympathised with that in Iris, for it would seem that the only vice a
man of principle can understand is the vice of not enjoying what he has
forfeited his principles to do. Hilary couldn’t, obviously, forgive Iris
for not having grown common and meretricious and, in the slim beastly
sense, coarse, as the other “rotten ladies” did. He couldn’t, obviously,
forgive her for the continued graciousness of her outward seeming, and
of her inner seeming too, if one didn’t know those things about her. He
couldn’t, obviously, forgive her for being so indifferent to every
distinction of class that she was equally indifferent, with the whole
calm of her mind, to being “declassed.” And he couldn’t, obviously,
forgive himself for still, God knew how, seeing in her the same
qualities that he had seen in the long little thing, all brown stockings
and blue eyes. If only Hilary had been a sentimentalist, and could have
closed his eyes against what he did not wish to see and could have
opened his eyes to see all that he did wish to see! But Hilary was a
realist with a backward-seeing eye. The Iris of long ago should have
been dead, choked to death by this grown-up Iris--but, and there lay the
perversity of this grown-up Iris who had kicked through every restraint
of caste and chastity, it wasn’t dead at all, she was still essentially
the same Iris who had walked with her governess up South Audley Street.
But, the devil, all these men! Yet there she was ... profoundly
_un_different, profoundly as though untouched by any more soiling breath
than that of the lightest passage of the years. It was, you might hear
Hilary thinking, confoundedly unfair to all decent womanhood, Iris’s
immunity in the abyss. He should not like her--no, there should not be
left anything about her for a decent man to like. The friend of Iris’s
childhood couldn’t help a savage anger with her for retaining the
interest of a clean, and otherwise balanced, mind. The friend of
childhood liked the woman so deeply that, being a man of principle, he
could see only her worst side. And then the man of principle would fall
into the toils of the friend of childhood, and whilst the two
antagonists were wrestling together they could see only the side of the
woman that it made them the most wretched to see. The very fact that
Hilary was deeply attached to Iris made him see only her worst side.
Many good men call that “liking” a woman. Many good women call that
“idealism” in men.


IV

It is curious how many irrelevant details will crowd back into the mind
when one is trying to reconstruct only the main passage of an evening,
which was throughout, now one looks back on it, as though directed to
its inevitable end. I remember how, through one of the long silences
common to our odd, antagonistic intimacy, I sat staring into my
brandy-glass--those Gargantuan ones, Hilary had--and wondering at
Hilary’s, well, unsentimental sentimentality; and then I wondered what
sort of a fight the man of principle would put up against the friend of
childhood should Iris ever show the faintest inclination to take as her
third husband Mr. Townshend of Magralt. The man of principle would lose
... happily lose or unhappily, you could not tell, for no man can tell
what odd happinesses, more secretly kept than crimes, another man will
snatch from intimacy with a woman whom he would detest if he did not
desire.

But through the silences of that evening there walked mainly the figure
of the legend of Boy Fenwick, a boyish figure midst a babble of confused
rumours and knowing silences. Yet I was so concerned not to appear, to
that watchful and dangerous friend of childhood, too interested in Mrs.
Storm, that the name of Boy Fenwick hung on my lips before I was out
with it. Oh, that name of Boy Fenwick! One knew it so well and so dimly,
it would so often be just dropped into a conversation by some friend of
his or some friend of a friend, just the name with a passing regret, to
the perpetuation of his charm and his time....

Many will, no doubt, remember the details of what must have been one
among the minor sensations of that time better than I can pretend to. It
happened during the summer of 1913, when I, having just left school, was
enjoying a first taste of freedom up and down Switzerland, and was far
from the long arm of even the Continental _Daily Mail_. Boy Fenwick was
found, on that dawn of his wedding-night, lying in the courtyard of the
Hôtel Vendôme in Deauville, dead of a broken collar-bone. He had fallen,
it appeared, from his bedroom window on the third floor. His beautiful
young wife (I collect the bits of rumour that came to me later) had been
asleep, had suddenly awoken to a sharp feeling of solitude, had happened
to look out at the dawn....

Tests were made, and it was found that a man could, given certain
conditions, have fallen out of that window. The hotel management
suggested that a man could, given certain conditions, fall out of almost
any window. Among the certain conditions suggested, tactfully, was
champagne. That was, I believe, adopted, tactfully. Much, of course,
must have been said and printed about the beautiful girl, Mrs. Fenwick;
and there was provided a little comic relief to the affair in the
scarcely suppressed indignation of the illustrated papers, for the
beautiful Mrs. Fenwick had in some way prevailed on Sebastian Roeskin,
the photographer in Dover, not to issue any of her photographs, and had
shown a remarkable ingenuity in evading the street-camera. And, the
tragedy happening at Deauville during the _Grande Semaine_--Deauville
at that time was still in the first flush of its victory over
Trouville--it was hushed up as quickly as possible.

Boy Fenwick had only that year come down from Oxford, and his memory was
treasured by his many friends both there and in London. Indeed, to one
who heard of him only when he had become legend, and when the first
edition of a slim book of poetry by him, published posthumously with a
charming introduction by P. L., had attained to a price only surpassed
later by Rupert Brooke’s memory, he appears to have been the most
beloved of the beloved young men of that time. To youth of this decade,
grown now a little impatient of the careless wise-seeming pastime of
indulging “sound” scepticisms or catholic idealisms, those youths of the
days before the war must seem to have been the most gifted of God’s
creatures who ever walked this earth, always excluding the glory that
was Greece. Several, to be sure, survive until this day, but nothing
could be more unjust than to approach a man’s youth in the light of the
shadow that he casts in his early thirties. Yet they would verily seem,
those few dead young men, to have a certain god-like quality of
immortality denied to the multitude that died with them and for whom
cenotaphs and obelisks and memorials must do duty for memory: that they
should retain the regret of their many friends is not remarkable, but it
is odd, and pleasant, how they will ever and again loiter, gay and
handsome and “sound,” in the imagination of those who never knew them.
Boy Fenwick’s name, now, would ever and again pass like a phantom of
beauty and laughter across some conversation: so real, so dim. He had
been notable, it seemed--and this is the only clear thing I had ever
heard about him--for a certain catholic idealism that was almost an
obsession with him. So, I was to think this night, thrusting from me the
legend of Boy Fenwick, so it would seem. An idealist! Yes, Boy Fenwick
was an idealist. But would I had the debonair truculence of that
puissant nobleman, the Earl of Birkenhead, who has dared to say, in an
age given over to the new-rich snobbery of exalting plain, normal men:
“I do not like meek men.” I, had I that presence, would say: “I do not
like idealists.”

Yet it was not to be over this dinner with Hilary that I was to be given
the full sum of the idealism of that handsome young god who, beloved of
many, was the hero of one March and the fate of another. That was to
come much later, on a night that was the sister of this night.

Mrs. Storm could have been no more than nineteen or twenty at the time
of that tragedy at Deauville. And I suppose I must have remarked,
probably apropos of nothing but Hilary’s passing me the matches, how
very terrible it must have been for a young girl, for Hilary passed,
through one of those pregnant pauses which seem always to preface the
cruelties of kind people, his Gargantuan brandy-glass round about his
nose. “And,” he said thoughtfully, “rather more terrible for him, don’t
you think?”

“I suppose,” I said in all innocence, “that he was tipsy or something,
to fall out like that....”

Hilary looked at me through his glass, for the rim reached his eyebrows
as he sipped, in that way which is supposed, I believe, to make noisy
Labour interruptors feel such fools as even a clown must despise.

“But, Hilary,” I couldn’t help crying out, “you’re not implying that he
threw himself out!”

Hilary, because I had given way to a moment’s emphasis, gained instantly
in leisured calm. “Hm,” he said. Gently he put down his huge glass.
“Hm,” he said. He considered the stump of his cigar and decided that it
was not worth while relighting it. “Hm,” he said, and took another from
the box, pinching it. I passed him the matches. “Hm,” he said. But not I
to be provoked! I did to him what Mr. Beerbohm once so notably did to
the late Mr. James Pethick in the Casino at Dieppe: I plied the spur of
silence.

“Boy Fenwick,” said Hilary, lighting his cigar, “was a young man of
quality. I don’t mean the word in the flashy sense in which you use it
in your stories. But of _quality_--in mind and spirit. And yet,” in a
volume of white smoke he smothered the failing light of the match, “he
chucked himself out of that window.”

And, you know, just at that moment I saw him doing that, and Iris lying
in bed....

Hilary was angry. The very thought of that buried tragedy seemed to
wrench that inside tap a little looser, but still the savage, hurt
bewilderment would not quite reach his skin.

“Of course,” I said, “they just said it was an accident, then....”

“Naturally,” murmured Hilary.

Naturally, Mrs. Boy Fenwick had not hurt her husband’s name by saying
publicly that he had died of his own will. “And then,” said Hilary,
“you come to the upside-down morality of an Iris March, the part of her
that’s steel and iron and gold. She ruined herself, telling the truth.”

“But,” I said humbly, “if you had preferred not to think of her as
ruined, need you have believed that it was the truth?”

“Iris,” said Hilary, “never lies. It bores her. One quite naturally gets
into the habit of taking everything she says literally; for it always
will be literally true, particularly if it’s against herself. She
hasn’t, you see, a trace of the self-preservative instinct. Hm. Pity.”

Iris Fenwick couldn’t, it seemed, endure for one moment the idea that
his friends should think that Boy had fallen out in a moment of tipsy
dizziness--Boy being well known to be a very light drinker, and Iris
abominating drink, “the very idea of drink,” Hilary said, “as only the
daughter of a drunkard and the sister of a drunkard can. If you ever get
to know her at all well,” he suddenly smiled, “you may be a little put
out, in the natural satisfaction of your thirst, by seeing Iris look
just a little, well, sulky. Unreasonable, yes. But they get unreasonable
about drink, daughters or sisters or wives of drunkards.”

Mrs. Boy Fenwick had seemed to feel most deeply her responsibility to
Boy’s memory and to his friends’ love for him. She simply had, it
seemed, to safeguard the love they had for him, by making it clear that
he had died as he had lived. In disenchantment of an ideal--that, if Boy
was to commit suicide at all, could be his only possible justification.
His suicide, as apart from his death, naturally scarred his friends, but
not so deeply when they knew that it was done in the despair of the
disenchantment of an ideal. Boy’s friends would understand that
completely, Iris must have felt, for were they not Boy’s friends? He was
sensitive even to madness--they could, indeed they’d have to, think
that. But that he was given something to rouse his sensitiveness and to
overturn his balance--she had, Iris seemed to have felt, to tell his
friends that, so that, in giving Iris all the blame that was her due,
they should retain their memory of a Boy strong to the end in idealism.
And they seemed, I gathered from Hilary, to have done that without
stint. Hilary, too--for wasn’t he a realist, that man? One could see
them all at it, Boy’s friends to Boy’s widow--the dead adored youth in
their minds, the still, pale, beautiful girl between them. She had to
tell Gerald. You can imagine that....

She had, Hilary said, a quite unearthly beauty just at that time, and
was so still, so terribly _un_young somewhere inside her. “It was my
fault,” she had said. She had been looking when he had thrown himself
out of the window. He had just lit a cigarette, she said.

“That a girl of that age,” said Hilary, “that a girl whose moral
character, you can’t help seeing, was ... well, what it was, should be
so impelled to tell the truth at her own expense, at the expense of her
own ruin, at the expense of a queer brother’s hatred, for that must have
hurt her most of all, by a sense of honour that would make even the
rigidity of a Guy look small, well----”

“But isn’t that where, Hilary, there comes in that ‘caste’ which you
complain of her having always ignored?”

But Hilary wasn’t going back on any of his words. A “hm,” and he was
off, saying that it made him think there was something in the stale
paradox that you never know the best about a woman until you know the
worst. “But, God in Heaven, what a worst!”

She had wanted, Hilary tried to explain--pathetically, you can see,
trying to make clear to himself the noble as well as the shady side of
Iris--to keep permanent, even to reinforce, the love for Boy of Boy’s
friends by the idea that he had died untamed of his ideal. You could see
her, Hilary said, meeting Gerald half-way on that. “Boy died,” she had
said, “for purity.”

“Hilary! She said that!”

And that, you know, was all that she had said! Boy Fenwick had died “for
purity.” That was all.

“It seems,” I couldn’t help thinking aloud, “very sweeping....”

It was, Hilary said grimly--and very pointed, in a girl not twenty!

“But!” I murmured.

Boy’s friends, Hilary said, could naturally put only one construction on
it. Naturally, Hilary said. “For purity!” And Iris’s friends could put
no other. What, after all, didn’t “for purity” mean? It could mean, to
all the decent people of the world, but one thing....

Hilary looked at me in inquiry. I had made a noise. But I was so
surprised. “You don’t mean,” I tried not to gasp, “that you condemn her
on that for Boy Fenwick’s death!”

“One doesn’t,” snapped Hilary, “‘condemn’ an Iris March, an Iris
Fenwick, an Iris Storm. They stand condemned in themselves. They are
outside the law by which we----”

“Hilary, as the Girondins were put by the Jacobins!”

“We’re not perfect,” said Hilary quietly, “but we’re not _that_. What
Iris was at nineteen or so--or before, evidently--she has been ever
since.”

“What, as brave!”

“As loose. She made a gesture after Boy’s death, a fine gesture--and
then she set about proving how she had that in her to disenchant a Boy
to his death. She had ... ‘affairs.’ Not, you know, one long affair ...
but ‘affairs.’ Oh, quite openly. You’ve no doubt heard about some of
them. And when four years later young Storm married her, against his
people’s wishes, she was no more than--well, what do you call those
people? _Demi-mondaines?_ And since Storm’s death....”

“But!” I said, and also I said what it was in my mind to say, for are we
sticks, are we stones, or are we human? It was Boy Fenwick I was
thinking of, not of Iris’s life later, although it seemed to me that Boy
Fenwick had had a good deal to do with that, too. I had begun by
provoking Hilary. He had, with that appalling talent of his for
appearing reasonable, provoked me. He could arouse all that was worst in
a man, could Hilary. He had aroused all that was worst in me against
that young purity hero. It seemed to me that it was, to say the least,
rather hasty of a young man to die “for purity” in connection with a
girl of twenty. “Hilary, in two thousand years we have discovered only
one caddish way of getting to Heaven, and Boy Fenwick, like many
‘idealists,’ has taken it.”

“You probably don’t realise,” said Hilary, oh nreasonably, “the depths of
sudden despair--in decent people.”

“But I thought we were discussing human beings!” And, as regards human
beings, one couldn’t help thinking that a girl who had confessed that
her lover had died “for purity” was purer than the lover who had not
been able to live for it. Boy Fenwick’s death had an air of getting away
with rather a good thing. He had destroyed the girl by exalting
himself--for purity! How did boys come to have the infernal conceit of
setting themselves up as connoisseurs of purity? And he had taken care
to leave his corpse in such a position as best to foul the fountains of
his young widow’s womanhood. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle ought to speak to
him about it.

“Words!” said Hilary. “Words, words!”

“Well, we can’t all,” I pleaded, “talk by throwing ourselves out of
windows. And I was brought up to believe that it was caddish to sneak on
a woman, whether for purity or for humbug.”

“It was Iris,” said Hilary, “who sneaked on herself.”

“Only because, Hilary, she didn’t want the young man to waste such a
fine suicide. She didn’t want to do him out of the glory of dying for
true-blue manhood. At the age of twenty a girl is justified in having a
belief in true-blue manhood. But Mrs. Storm seems to have grown up since
then.”

Hilary indulged me. I was young. “Of course,” he said, “the boy wasn’t
quite sane. Hm. But he loved Iris--you know, extravagantly--as Hector
Storm did later. Iris isn’t, it seems, one of those women you love a
little. And Boy loved purity. And because, of course, the two simply
didn’t go together--the shock, man, of realising that, to a boy in
love!--he went on his own way. And I don’t think,” said Hilary, as
though he was trying hard to be fair to one, “that we should sneer at
the things men die for--even that young madmen die for.”

In England, I reflected sulkily, you may not apply the faintest touch of
reason to any of the accepted laws of life and death without being
accused of sneering. The accusation is invaluable in puissance. It has
made England what she is. It at once stops all argument, all nonsense,
all sense, all thinking. So powerful is the effect that the one accused,
thinking that perhaps he _was_ sneering, at once checks his mind from
further thought on that line. The word creates a vacuum. No one likes to
be thought he is sneering--when he was merely, for a change, thinking.
It is like being told you have no “sense of humour.” It damns you
completely, because it makes you damn yourself. And one of the reasons
why there can never be a Marxist revolution in England is that the
rebels will be told that they are sneering at the King. They will be
abashed.

“Seldom,” said Hilary thoughtfully, “have I known a man pull his weight
less than you are doing this evening. Hm. I should try some brandy.”




CHAPTER FOUR: APHRODITE


I

One chapter can’t reasonably be expected to bear the weight of that
night. We have so far built but the groundwork of that night, and on
that we have now to shape a peculiar edifice, according to the flimsy
but saturnine manner of the third decade of the twentieth century; to
which majority the twentieth century has attained, as more austere
histories will tell you, only after the most unparalleled pains,
retchings, belchings and bellowings; but we, taking a more private
course, will be more circumspect in our derangements.

We have, so far that night, seen Gerald Haveleur March, by the way. We
have seen his evening paper; but we have not read it. (Nor had Hilary
read his _Evening Standard_. He always “glanced at it,” he excused
himself later on, as he was going to bed. As I did, if ever.) We have,
also by the way, noted the presence in London of the car of the flying
stork. We have dined, and had some brandy. We have talked of purity, and
discovered an amiable dissonance in our views thereon. We would then, at
about eleven o’clock, have by ordinary gone towards bed, for after
dining with Hilary one somehow always went straightway to bed. That was
why, Guy said cruelly, one dined with Hilary. The “hm’s” seemed to
soothe the way thither. But that evening, however it came about, I did
not feel that I would like to go straightway to bed. One has, I suppose,
moods.

But I can’t account plausibly for the fact that Hilary came with me to
the Loyalty. Hilary did not go to night-clubs. His moods took a more
exclusive course. He ignored night-clubs, and thought he was ignoring
the whole of folly. Not so superior, I! Wherefore it passed that I
discovered my mood to Hilary as we stood in the hall of his house, for
Hilary was accompanying me to the door. Ross, red and silent and
amiable, stood somewhere about with my hat. Where we stood, just without
the door, the unusually warm June night smiled kindly on us. There is
not much sky in London, but that little smiled on us with a faint load
of stars, and somewhere behind the roofs there might be hanging a moon.
There might? But there was such a pretty tilted silver boat among the
chimneys of Curzon House! From the small table in the hall Hilary had
absently taken up the evening-paper, which was folded in that way which
tells you in the Stop-Press News that Surrey has scored 263 for eight
wickets. He held it in his hand with that air of one who has nothing
left to do but read an evening-paper. Grey and thoughtful and kind, he
stood there in the doorway of his tall sombre house, looking up at the
faint stars on the ceiling of Chesterfield Street: his was just that
contained air of loneliness that unmarried schoolmasters wear during
their holidays. “Hm,” he said. “Nice night....”

“Hilary, why don’t you come with me? It won’t probably be amusing, but
we can always come away....”

“Dancing,” he frowned. Hilary likes dancing, really. Only, not being
exactly supreme among dancers, he never can understand how good dancers
may like dancing so much that they will dance whenever they can. If
Hilary had been a writer he would have put very witty and biting bits
about dancing into his books. All writers have clumsy feet.

I made to assure him that he would find himself in the most polite
company, for the Loyalty Club was notable as a relaxation for
Government, diplomacy, and princes of the blood. He “hm’d” viciously at
that, but set out with me down Curzon Street and through the noisome
shadows of Shepherd’s Market. Gerald’s light was on. But now that I was
not there to turn it out, when would Gerald’s light not be on?

Through the deep cavernous artery of Whitehorse Street we emerged on to
Piccadilly, quiet as before the storm that would at any moment break on
it from the theatres. Buses, their lights within revealing the seats,
fled madly as though from a doomed city. Loitering taxicabs, attracted
like moths to a flame by walking silkhats, came near the curb, hung in
doubt, loitered on.

I wondered whether she would be at the Loyalty. She might. I wondered
whether she could have accepted the sacrifice of herself “for purity”
without question, without bitterness. She would--that “Chislehurst
mind!” Oh, yes, she would have agreed with that idealist’s harshest
judgment--indeed, she had agreed with it so completely that she had
plucked two words from her heart and given them to the world to whip her
with. Boy Fenwick, you could see, had impressed himself like an
anchorite’s scourge on the souls of the twins. What was it she had said?
“It would be nice to die for purity.” Heavens, but wasn’t she sickened
of purity! That pitiful, pitiless moment in the bedroom of the Hôtel
Vendôme! The messy kindergarten that men make of love, and call it
“romance,” “idealism”! Perhaps Judas was the first idealist--that
desperate, exalted betrayal of the body to the soul. They are so certain
about their souls, your carnal idealists! Soul, soul, soul! May their
punishment be to meet their souls face to face in the afterworld! One
could see that boy, a slim pyjama’d figure by the window, a silhouette
of cold fire with the ruin of all mankind in his clean eyes, staring
through the meretricious dawn of Deauville towards the goal to which he
was exalted beyond reason by his disenchantment. He had loved Iris
madly.... But they do not love, those men! They torture, and are
tortured. They take love as they might take a flower out of a garden,
and they torture it because it does not thrive so well in the water of
their tears as in the water of God’s good sense. They do not love, those
men, they stand in wonder before the power to love that is in them. And
theirs the pleasure of a spurious conceit; theirs the pain of a spurious
disenchantment. If that boy had loved, he would have turned towards the
bed on which she lay, beaten, silenced, a child groping for sense, for
pity, for any reasonable thing, and he would have tried to understand,
and maybe he would have found the grace to understand, that in her,
despite and because of the hungers of the body, there was that frightful
humility to an unknown purpose which makes the limitless beauty of some
women. But the boy had lit a cigarette....

“Don’t we cross?” muttered Hilary, and we crossed towards Jermyn Street,
for the Loyalty Club lies in Pall Mall, to the end that, in immediate
contact with the Royal Automobile Club, it may at least boast, as might
occur to a student of Ruskin, a degree of eminence in the abyss.

One is, one can’t help being, impelled by a sense of decorum to disavow
at once any connection which may be fancied by worldly readers between
the Loyalty Club and the Embassy Club. Such connection could not, of
course, be fancied if the Loyalty were so well known as the Embassy; but
the Loyalty is, or was--yes, was--the daughter of the Embassy, and
although it is not yet so well known to the people of the town, who
shall say that a daughter is not more of the mode than her mother? Even,
life being what it is, in spite of the mother.

The Loyalty sprang from the Embassy, and it sprang in a polite
direction, from Bond Street down the hill of Saint James’s to Pall Mall,
where it might lie over against Carlton House Terrace. It sprang because
certain persons of _ton_ had found that the Mother Society, while never
ordered but with the most polite amenities, was growing perhaps just a
little crowded with what-nots; had, by banding themselves in a body
financial and social, founded the Loyalty; and were there assured of
more freedom for the exercise of a reasonable exclusiveness since, the
floor-space of the Loyalty being large enough to accommodate only one
hundred and fifty dancers, the membership was strictly limited to one
thousand and five hundred. Below were a swimming-bath and squash-courts,
besides the more orthodox facilities; and while the whole place was
appointed with the severest economy, if not with downright meanness, it
is well known that those who spend more than a certain amount of money
for supper, and see other people spending as much, will need no other
assurance of being in surroundings of the first quality. That is a
well-known French invention, of which England has only recently acquired
the recipe.

The Loyalty Club can, however, claim no historical notice but in the
person of the Chevalier Giulio di Risotto, its _directeur du
restaurant_. We need not interrupt ourselves here to envy the salary at
which the Chevalier was with difficulty persuaded to leave his retreat
at Rapallo; but that he was worth it nobody can gainsay, for wheresoever
Risotto went he took with him his invention. His invention he called
_l’aristocracie internationale_; his name, you understand, for his
people; they loved it.

A study of the lives of philosophers and statesmen will inform and
ennoble the mind; but a sideways glance at such a phenomenon as the
twentieth-century Risotto cannot help but make it supple. One of the
menials of all time, he is one of the successes of ours; and a portent
of the doom of aristocracy in England. Born of Machiavelli by
Demoiselle Demi-monde, crafty, thin, pale, dry-shiny as shagreen, he had
walked to fortune about every great restaurant in Europe, adding always,
but with discrimination, to his order of _l’aristocracie
internationale_; and to bankruptcy twice, of truly patrician
magnificence, about the _baccara_ tables of his less inspired but more
cautious colleague, M. Cornuché of Cannes and Deauville. The “creation”
of the Loyalty Club must serve his biographers as the pinnacle of
Risotto’s career. _L’aristocracie internationale_ was ultimately served
at last. Not an American was left on Fifth Avenue, nor an Argentine in
the Americas; while Australian fruit-farms deplored the absence of their
masters, and Canada adored the _ton_ of her peerless millionaires.

We had no sooner entered among the company than Hilary was for going at
once: but Risotto having rewarded us with a sofa-table--for he and
Hilary had, as the saying is, been boys together when Hilary had been
attached to the Embassy in Paris and Risotto was ennobling patrons of
the Ritz to _l’aristocracie internationale_--he and I prevailed on
Hilary to stay by ordering for him an angel-on-horseback, to which he
was notably partial; while I, Risotto said, would have a haddock with a
nice egg on it.

Hilary, like all middle-aged men who detest night-clubs, at once left me
to dance with the first acquaintance he saw. This was Mrs. Ammon.
Whereas I, in not dancing, was following an example set by many present.
We, we watched our elders dance with each other’s mothers, and for them
the band on the balcony played with a sensibility approaching grief.
There was no tune. But it is absurd, this querulous demand of young
people for “tunes”! Our fathers and our mothers have done with “tunes.”
Let there, our uncles say, be a rhythm. Let there, say our aunts, be
syncopation. There was a rhythm. There was syncopation. Grave, profound,
unforgettable, there was a rhythm. It had a beat like the throbbing of
an agonised heart lost in an artery of the Underground. Dolorous it was,
yet phantasm of gaiety lay twined in it. They call this rhythm the
Blues. It reminded you of past and passing things. It reminded you of
the days when, people over forty had still enough restraint not to crowd
out every ballroom and night-club with their dancing in open formation,
playfully aiming at each other’s tonsils with their feet. It reminded
you of the scent tangled in the hair of she with whom you had last
danced to that rhythm. You saw the soft line of her face by your
shoulder, the tender pocket behind her ear, the absorbed excursion of
her breath through her nostrils, the dark eyebrow over which you would
lightly pass the third finger of your left hand but that it would soil
the tip of it. You mourned the presence of the dead. You mourned the
memory of the living. They call this rhythm the Blues. It reminded you
of regret. It reminded you of a small white face suddenly thrown back
against your arm with a smile that disturbed the dance. It reminded you
of the desire that pleasantly turns to dust when you are desired. It
reminded you of things you had never done with women you had never met.
You danced again at the Ambassadeurs at Cannes, with the masts of
yachts drawn ebony-black between the tall windows and the pale blue
night over the sea. The Lido lay like a temptation before your mind, and
the songs of the gondoliers raved into the measure of whispering feet.
The Spanish King brushed by you at San Sebastian, eating salted almonds,
again you hesitated in the dance at Biarritz to listen to the roar of
the Atlantic, and across a perfumed street in Seville you again saw the
shiver of a mantilla through the cracked window of a cabaret. You danced
again beneath the vermilion moon of Algeria, between the American Bar
and the pyramid-cypress tree. You danced again in the Bois in Paris, the
trees like monstrous black pagodas against the night, the stars
brilliant as sequins on an archangel’s floating cloak, the magically
white faces of women, the lights in the night making love to the black
shadows in their hair, their lips red as lobsters, their arm-pits clean
as ivory, the men talking with facile gestures, the whole tapestry of
the Château de Madrid like a painted fan against a summer night. They
call this rhythm the Blues, which is short for a low state of vitality
brought about by the action of life on the liver. O Baby, it’s _divine_!

That is what they say, our elders.

Astorias, _chef d’orchestre_, stood at rest by the edge of the balcony,
his violin under his arm, his bow gently tapping the edge of a bowl of
nameless ferns that hid his feet. His negligence is informed with
depression, his poise leans on melancholy. The Blues, that man knows. He
seems to wonder why he is there, why any one is there, why every one is
there. No one can tell him, so he goes on doing nothing, lonely as a
star in hell. He does not toil, nor spin, nor play his violin. From the
crowded floor a woman, her face powdered brown, her mouth scarlet as the
inside of a pomegranate in a tale by Oscar Wilde, beseeches him with an
arm black-gloved to the shoulder to continue to play. He yields.

Nearby was a corner-table of eight young people. Maybe they would dance
later on. Suddenly one of the girls would give a loud laugh, and then
there would be silence. Of the four young men one looked as Richard of
Gloucester might possibly have looked, a little bent, a little sinister,
and pale, as though he had been reading a treatise on diseases far into
the night before. They were four married couples, and they had all been
boys and girls together, and they had a son and daughter apiece, and
they all went to the same dentist. The women had white oval faces, small
breasts, blue eyes, thin arms, no expression, no blood: literally, of
course, not genealogically. One of them stared with wide blue eyes right
into people’s faces, and blinked vaguely. She was lovely. These eight
young people were very happy. They ignored everything but themselves, in
whom they were not very interested. Presently a prince of the blood
joined them, there was a little stir for a minute or two, a little
laughter, and then he rose to dance with the girl of the blind blue
eyes. As she danced she stared thoughtfully at the glass dome of the
ceiling. She looked bored with boredom.

There were many green dresses: jade-green, October green, rusty green,
soft green, sea-green, dying green, any shade of green that would suit
the expiring voices of formal women in a garden by Watteau. There were
thirty-nine green dresses. There was a Jewess of the wrong sort in the
wrong sort of green. She looked like a fat asparagus whose head had been
dipped in dressing and then put in a warm place to dry. She dried in
patches. A caravan of pearls crawled upwards from her bosom to her
throat, and she said to Mr. Trehawke Tush, the novelist: “The only
decent cocktails you can get in Paris are at the Ritz Bar, but the
people are so odd. My Archie wants to stand for Parliament. What do you
think?” Mr. Trehawke Tush, portraits of whose pre-war face must be
familiar to every one, was the most successful of the younger novelists,
and had earned from Miss Rebecca West the praise that he was “the leader
of the spats school of thought.” Mr. Trehawke Tush will go down to
history as the originator of Pique as a profitable literary idea. He had
hit on the discovery that English library subscribers will
whole-heartedly bear with any racy and illegal relation between the
sexes if the same is caused by Pique. He had observed that the whole
purpose of a “best-seller” is to justify a reasonable amount of adultery
in the eyes of suburban matrons. He had observed that in no current
English novel was there ever a mention of any woman having a lover
because she wanted a lover: she always took a lover because something
had upset her, as in real life she might take an aspirin. Mr. Trehawke
Tush had then created Pique, and was spoken of as a “brilliant feminine
psychologist.” Since the rise of Mr. Trehawke Tush no reviewer will take
any count of a writer as a “brilliant feminine psychologist” unless he
can explain the regrettable adultery of his leading female character by
the word Pique. This will also persuade _Punch_ reviewers to consider
the tale wholesome. Mr. Trehawke Tush was up to all those dodges. He
said: “I have just finished a serial for _The Daily Sale_. I want to
show up this kind of thing, the waste, the Indecency of it. All these
girls. I thought the editor might take objection to certain passages, as
there is some strong bedroom stuff in it, but he only asked me to change
one thing. I had put ‘he kissed her where he would,’ and so I changed it
to ‘as he would.’”

In a corner far across the crowded room sat Venice Pollen, most sedately
between her father and her mother. We waved, and decided that it was too
crowded to dance; but we did not know, Venice and I, that we were met
that night in darkness.

Observe Venice. We will always be found on Venice’s side, and why?
because she is a darling. Mark her now, and how the smoke about her
clears, how clean she is, and so excited! For Venice! You know she is
excited because she is so still, there between her hard father and her
monstrous fat mother. Mark her there, a green flower with a mad golden
head. And her eyes are blue, mad blue, and she is the queen of ten
thousand freckles, of which she is very contemptuous, saying: “Who wants
freckles?” And she had a noble forehead which would crinkle when she did
not catch what you said, and that was often enough, for she was always
talking herself. “Darling, darling, _darling_!” That is what she would
say. And on her lion’s-cub head was a tumult of short dusty-gold hair,
which was by nature rebellious, so that she must ever and again be
giving her head a fierce backward shake, as though that was going to do
any good. Mark her there, so sedate between her hard father and her
monstrous fat mother. Not sedate really, Venice! Yet she must be sedate
now, for Venice, who by ordinary knew not fear, was as though fascinated
by fear of her father, who was none other than Nathaniel Pollen, once of
Manchester, but now of Hampshire and Berkeley Square, for was he not as
rich as Crœsus would have been had Crœsus owned the half of the
newspapers of England?

So there sat Venice, most excited-still, undoubtedly waiting for Napier.
They were lovers, Napier and Venice, and in three days they would be
married. Dark, shy, handsome Napier! Favourite of the gods, you might
well call him, yet his was that rare, surprising quality which will keep
a man poised in continual sunshine, which will never let him droop and
laze in the certainty that his sins of omission and casualness will be
forgiven him. He was, to talk for a change of the things that matter, in
the Foreign Office, and worked conscientiously hard at a career which
would--“undoubtedly,” they said, “undoubtedly”--in the course of time
place Napier among the most honoured of the nation’s servants; although
he would--“undoubtedly,” one can’t help feeling, “undoubtedly”--reach in
the course of time the very same pinnacle if he did no work at all, for
England and America are the only two countries left in the world wherein
men’s charm and good looks are really appreciated by men in the
political, high financial, diplomatic, and educational spheres.

Our table faced the swing-doors across the room, and through the crowd
of dancers one could see who passed in and out. There was a press of
young men standing vaguely by the door, perhaps doubtful whether they
should stay or go to return another day. A very haughty and
flushed-looking lady, expensively dressed in a _dernier cri_, which she
wore like armour, tramped past them, looked suspiciously into their
bland faces, and out. She suspected they might be thinking she was going
to more than powder her nose. They were, she was, who cared?

A voice rose above the saxophone at the table to the left of mine. It
came from a heavy, drooping man with the eyes of a schoolboy, the smile
of a genius, the gestures of a conqueror, and the face of a bully. He
said: “There are two things in England that not even God could afford to
be truthful about: Himself and the Navy.” With the man of destiny was
the most beautiful woman in Ireland (Ulster) and a dark woman with a
high bust and flashing eye, who spoke Cockney with an American accent.
Her father was a lord. She said: “I am growing to detest London. There
is nowhere to go and nothing to do when you get there.” The most
beautiful woman in Ireland (Ulster) had hair as black as a raven’s wing
and two aquamarines for eyes, while the symmetry of her features
appalled the epithet. She said: “I took my little Juno out to tea with
Fay Avalon to-day and she was so naughty on the handsome parquet floor,
the mother’s darling!”

Then things happened. Gerald happened. Gerald and Aphrodite.... Venice,
Iris, Guy de Travest, Hugo Cypress, Napier, Colonel Duck, Gerald ... if
only one had a cinema for a moment! And there was also my Lady Pynte,
with whom I should have been dancing. Where Mrs. Ammon went there also
went Cornelia Pynte, and where Lady Pynte went there also went Angela
Ammon. They were fine hearty women. And since Hilary was dancing with
Mrs. Ammon I ought instantly to have begged the honour of taking the
floor with Lady Pynte. There she sat, across the room, alone, a fine
hearty woman. But, then, one goes to a night-club to think, to be alone,
to be comfortable, to eat a haddock. Lady Pynte thought dancing Good
Exercise, and she was taller than me, too. A fine woman. Once, as Hilary
toiled by with Mrs. Ammon, he whispered fiercely over her shoulder: “Why
don’t you dance with the old trout?” But I drowned discourtesy to Lady
Pynte in wine, for it was a “late night” at the Loyalty, which meant
that you could drink wine until they took it from you. Lady Pynte was
renowned as one of the five best women riders to hounds in the country.
It was said that the foxes in the Whaddon Chase country ceased laughing
when any one said “Pynte!” near them. But Lady Pynte also had her
politics, and she headed Movements; while Angela Ammon was more of a
literary turn. Lady Pynte liked young men to Do; Mrs. Ammon to Dare.
Lady Pynte liked young men to be Healthy and Normal; Mrs. Ammon
preferred them to be Original. Lady Pynte liked Boys to be Boys; Mrs.
Ammon didn’t mind if they were girls so long as they were Original. Lady
Pynte insisted on Working for the Welfare of the People at Large and Not
Just Our Own Little Class, she played bridge with a bantering tongue and
a Borgia heart, she maintained that the best place at which to buy shoes
was Fortnum & Mason’s, and if she saw you innocently taking the air of a
sunny morning she would say: “You look not at all well, my good young
man. Why don’t you take some Clean, Healthy exercise? You ought to be
Riding.” That was why one maintained a defensive alliance with one’s
haddock rather than do the manly thing and dance with Lady Pynte. She
would say one ought to be riding, and for four years I had hidden from
Lady Pynte the fact that I did not know how to ride. I simply did not
dare to confess to Lady Pynte that I could not ride. I had already tried
to pave the way to that dénouement by confessing that I came from the
lower classes, but she did not appear to think that any class could be
so Low as that. She would show one round her stables, and one felt an
awful fool standing there in the cold being expected to be intelligent
about the various horses, whereas one could only mutter, “Ah, good
horse!” or “Oh, there’s a fine horse!” until one day I remembered what
Peter Page, the critic, had once told me, that whenever he was shown a
horse by a horse-lover he would instantly say “What withers!” and thus
create a sound and manly impression as a horse-fancier. But when I came
out impressively with “What withers!” I thought that Lady Pynte looked
at me suspiciously, and Hilary, who was also fancying horses with us,
told me later that it wasn’t done to look a lady straight in the eye and
say “What withers!” Horses make life complicated, that is what it is.

Hugo Cypress, dancing by with his wife Shirley, called out: “Ho, there!
Seen the evening-paper? Friend of yours....”

“What?” I said. “Hugo....” But what on earth was this about the
evening-paper? I was agitated--suddenly, I was very agitated indeed.
There is something quite beastly about evening-papers, beastly and
naked....

Astorias stayed his men, and Hilary came back to the table. Gloomily he
looked at the angel that was frozen to its horse. And he looked worried.

“Hilary, what’s this I heard Hugo murmuring about the evening-paper?”

“Gerald,” said Hilary. “Hm....”

“But what, Hilary? Not serious, surely?”

“Oh, not serious,” Hilary grunted. “Not serious. Hm. Just a nasty silly
mess, I think. Didn’t catch what. Hm....”

I realised then that I had known all the time. That curious, hopeless
grinning.... But, good Lord, what sort of a mess? Hilary didn’t know.
“Something in the evening-paper,” he said. Hilary looked hurt, worried,
and I had that jumpy feeling that I must do something at once. But what
sort of a mess? A drunkard’s row? What? Hilary didn’t know, and I was
just about to ask the waiter if he could find me an evening-paper when
two figures by the door held my eye. And a third just behind them.

“Kids!” murmured Hilary, with a sort of grudging smile. And they looked
just that, for all their beauty--“kids.” One saw them playing together
under a tree. A long while ago, they had played together under a tree.
The favourite of the gods and the shameless, shameful lady....

“Hm,” grumbled Hilary. “Imitation....”

But I knew, for I once had a friend who was a taxidermist. There were
396 white ermines round Iris. White and tawny and white. She was like a
light, and you hadn’t realised what an infernal dungeon the place was
until the door had suddenly opened and she had come in, wrapped in cloth
of soft snow. Boy’s head, curly head, white and tiger-tawny. She was
like a light, a sad, white light. I can’t describe her but like that.
Napier had been standing by the door, waiting for the dance to cease, so
that he might join Venice. Then Iris had come in, grave, very
unself-conscious. She didn’t see Napier. He didn’t see Iris. Her
companion was Colonel Duck, M.F.H.

“God, that man!” sighed Hilary. Oh, Iris was hopeless! Why, of all men,
Colonel Duck?

Napier made to walk away. Iris and Colonel Duck made to follow Risotto.
Maybe one of the 396 white ermines just brushed Napier’s sleeve. Maybe
this, maybe that. “Kids!” said Hilary. Napier had started round, looked
blank: tall, slender, dark-haired, dark eyes always fevered with a fear
of you could never tell what--they almost blinked now, you thought, at
the light that Iris was, and she with her pools of eyes simply blazing
with surprise and an unsure smile parting the painted mouth. “Napier!”
“Iris!” As though, you know, some one with a soft “There!” had turned a
tap somewhere. They smiled completely. Well, they would, the old
friends. Naturally. She wouldn’t, I was sure, be calling him “Naps,” and
she detesting abbreviations and the like.

The wrong sort of Jewess gave a short, audible outline of Iris to Mr.
Trehawke Tush. Hilary stared at her venomously. Then he stared across
the room at Colonel Duck venomously. Colonel Duck stood behind Iris’s
white shoulder, a red dragon of a man, smiling relentlessly with his
well-known geniality. Napier did not appear to see Colonel Duck, M.F.H.
Napier and Iris were talking very quickly, laughing, maybe rather shyly.
Then Astorias, refreshed, hurled his men against the conversation;
bravely it held on for a second or two, then lay shuddering and
shattered, and gone was Napier, gone Iris towards a table with Colonel
Duck, whose red, relentless geniality showed no hint of the certain fact
that the next time he was at that talkative club of his he would say
that Napier Harpenden had been another of Iris Storm’s “affairs” and
might quite well be again, Iris Storm being what she was. Notably good
at all games and sports was Colonel Duck, M.F.H., and therefore
tolerated with respect by decent men.

“I wonder if she knows anything about Gerald,” I was saying, when from
her table across the room she seemed to be beckoning. To Hilary, not to
me. She looked very serious. The emerald shone on the third finger of
her right hand. She did not appear to see me. I felt bitter.

“Hm,” growled Hilary. He wanted to be persuaded to go. He wanted to go
reluctantly. “Hate that Duck man so,” he said pathetically.

“Go on, Hilary. She might know something. I’ll get a paper.”

“Why, there’s Guy!” said Hilary. “Must have just come up from Mace.
There, by the door....”

The carpet of colours, on which the men were sprinkled like the black
smuts on a town garden, swayed between us and the doorway, but no crowd
might hide that man, for he was tall as a tree and his crisp yellow hair
glared like a menace above the intervening heads and his frozen blue
eyes petrified smoke, noise, and distance. Hilary was standing, about to
go towards Iris. He looked rather sheepish at being found by Guy at the
Loyalty. Most unsmiling was Guy that night.

“Ross must have told him we were here,” I said. “He’ll have come about
Gerald....”

“This foul place!” Hilary snapped. “You go downstairs with Guy, and I’ll
get Iris to rid herself of her fancy friend and bring her down....”


II

And that was how, soon after midnight that night, I found myself for the
first time in the car of the flying stork. For the first time.... Iris
had dropped her boyish-looking chauffeur in the course of the evening,
because, she said, she only liked driving at night, when the air blew
clean and chill. She drove with assurance, that is to say, she drove as
though her mind was not in the same world as the steering-wheel. The
great bonnet swept round by the squat Palace and up the slope of Saint
James’s Street, which only by night may remember a little of the
elegance it has long since forfeited by day.

“But that’s not the point,” I remember saying. “He won’t care a button
what any one else is thinking about it. He’ll just go mad at the
humiliation in himself, he’ll worry it, making a mountain of
sordidness....” I had told her that Gerald had sent her his love, and
her eyes had lit up at that, and she had laughed, shyly. “That’s
better,” she had said, and now she said: “Yes, that’s the point. He’s
proud, proud as Lucifer ... and such a baby! Oh, Gerald, you sensitive
beast! I’m going abroad to-morrow, and he must either come with me or he
must join me quickly, quickly. You’ll persuade him, too, won’t you?” I
did not say that, if I knew Gerald, he would probably be in a state far
beyond persuasion. But, I thought, there was no harm in trying to see
him.

At first, when Guy had told me downstairs at the Loyalty, I had just
laughed. It seemed so absurd, fantastic. Gerald had been arrested in
Hyde Park for “annoying women!” It was, you can see, unbelievable. How
could Gerald “annoy” a woman, Gerald who was so shy that he could never
even speak to one? “But there it is,” said Guy.

Perhaps it is because that was the last time I was ever at the Loyalty,
but I remember the most irrelevant details and the vivid way each one
of them seemed to impress some part of my mind. Guy and I stood in the
deserted Bar. Through the open door at the far end came the clean,
somehow biting tang of a marble swimming-bath: a faint splash now and
then, a rustle of water: a boyish American voice calling sharp and loud:
“Dive, you Julie, dive and get it over! You’ve got no hips, kid, and you
can’t drown without hips. I want to go eat some food.” Then, I remember,
Billy Swift walked intently past us, towards the Cloak-room. He comes to
mind vividly because that was the last time I saw Billy Swift alive. His
thin, lined, scarlet face glowed with the health-giving breezes that
penetrate into corners of clubs and restaurants where men sit drinking
brandy; his blue eyes always peered eagerly and kindly at you, as though
he had something of the first importance to say. He said, very hoarsely:
“There’s a boy up there dancing with two wooden legs. Good boy, I call
him. Good night.” And in a minute or two he repassed us, walking
intently, his crimson grey-haired head, immaculate in every detail,
sticking like an old fighting-bird’s out of the wide astrakhan collar of
the coat that he always wore against the midnight chill. Two months
later he was found on the cliffs near Dover with that head beaten in,
and some one was hanged. Billy Swift wouldn’t have had him hanged. “My
fault,” he would have said hoarsely. “My fault, chaps.”

“But there it is,” Guy said thoughtfully. “Sickening, isn’t it? Might
appeal, of course....”

“He’ll not appeal,” I said. Imagine Gerald “appealing” against a
five-pound fine for “indecently annoying” a woman in Hyde Park!

Guy always spoke low, he murmured in a chill voice, but you could always
hear every word he said. Not that you didn’t, after a while, know all
his words by heart, for Guy’s was one of those vocabularies that a
classical education is supposed to have expanded. As he spoke he would
always be looking at some point just above the crown of your head.

“Sorry about that boy,” he was saying thoughtfully. “He’s had no luck.
And this Hyde Park business might happen to any one nowadays....” He
looked down at me suddenly from that height of his, and I was, as
always, surprised by the profound childishness which would suddenly
sweep the ice out of the blue of those eyes.

“Beasts,” he went on, almost pathetically. “But aren’t they--those Park
police? Arresting nice old clergymen, Privy Councillors, any one, just
because a poor old boy who’s been brought up too well feels like having
a word or two with a sickening woman. I mean, you need torpedo-netting
around you to get round the Park in safety nowadays. Well, don’t you?
And now they plant poor young Gerald. I’m sure, aren’t you, that these
police put the women there on purpose as--what d’you call them?”

“_Agents provocateurs?_”

“Well, have it your own way. But I’ve been watching the police round
about here lately, and of course they’re mostly very good fellows, the
best, but the police round the Park are quite a different lot. I’d like
to kick them for the way they look those poor devils of women up and
down as though they were dirt. I never thought much of the type of sneak
who went for the Military Police during the war, and these fellows seem
rather like that. Anything for an arrest and promotion.” He smiled
faintly. Guy’s eyes seemed always to get most frosty when he smiled. “I
once promoted some of them the wrong way for being inhuman. Inhuman,
that’s what these blighters get if you don’t keep an eye on them. And
these Park fellows seem somehow to have got spoilt since the war. I
mean, it just looks like that to an outsider. Good Lord, you’ve got to
have laws and to keep laws, but you needn’t set a lot of dirty sneaks at
the Bolshevik game of ruining gentlemen just for being silly old asses.”

I stared at the one black pearl that from time immemorial had stained
Guy’s shirt-front, which somehow seemed to fit him as no one else’s ever
could. Guy was easy to listen to, because you always knew what he would
say and how he would say it. (He had an enormous reverence for any man
of the smallest talent, any man “who did things with his brain.”)

“I saw him for a minute this evening,” I said. “He seemed rather queer,
but he said nothing about it....”

“But imagine the young devil! This business happened one night last
week, and he doesn’t then come to see you about it--or even Hilary or
me, because, of course, I’d have done all I could for him, for old
Barty’s sake as well as because he behaved himself in the war. I mean,
this will almost kill old Eve Chalice when she sees it in the morning
papers. It’s her I’m sorry for, for she’s always been fighting this
sticky patch in the March brood--first her eldest brother, old
Portairley, then her younger brother, Barty, then her niece Iris, and
now young Gerald comes along to make the poor old dear cry her eyes out
again. God, the vileness of it! Picking up odd women in parks. I haven’t
got a paper with me, but you ought to see the vile way they put down
every beastly detail, and you can see as clear as anything that it was
more bad luck and childishness on Gerald’s part than anything else. But,
good Lord, what’s the matter with the man! I mean, one simply doesn’t go
into the Park for women! The accuser, or whatever you call them, was a
woman called Spirit, and in evidence two plainclothes men and a
constable. I’m going to have an eye kept on Mrs. Spirit, just to see
all’s fair and square. I mean, it’s beginning to look as though the law
was the ass that St. George forgot to kill while he was showing off with
that sickening dragon. This Mrs. Spirit said--wish I had a paper--that
she was sitting on a bench waiting for her brother, when Gerald sat down
beside her and made ‘indecent’ proposals. Whereupon she was so
shocked--and she a grown-up married woman, too--that she jumped up like
a scalded cat and let out some sickening howls, and up come the police.
Now you can’t help thinking they were waiting behind a tree with old
Spirit as a bait, can you? and caught young Gerald instead of a Dean....
They’d get more promotion, I shouldn’t wonder, for a Dean....”

And as Guy spoke I saw Gerald glancing at the evening-paper on the curb
of Curzon Street, and I saw him suddenly throw back his head and laugh
at the heavens....

Gerald, Gerald! The despiser of the world caught by the meanest trap of
the world’s unrest. The worshipper of the hero who had died “for purity”
figuring in the filthy columns of the cheap Sunday Press as another
peer’s nephew gone wrong. Gerald, starved of life, Gerald who knew no
woman, Gerald who wrote the tale of a man who had lived “for purity” ...
and he had sat down beside a woman called Spirit on a bench in Hyde
Park. Those nightmare women who rave in the minds of lonely men, soft
women marvellously acquiescent, possible, the woman Aphrodite, goddess
of love and beauty, silent as marble, but acquiescent ... and Aphrodite
had dwindled into Mrs. Spirit, who was sitting waiting for her brother
in Hyde Park, and the law lurking nearby to give the Sunday papers
“copy.” And I saw Mr. Auk in an angle of the little tunnel, telling a
friend of his something funny about Gerald....

“It makes one just sick, Guy. Sick....”

“Now look here,” Guy murmured, tapping my shoulder with one finger.
“Don’t you waste any time being sick just now, but go round and see the
young devil----”

“I’m going straight away.”

“Bright boy. And just ... Oh, tell him it’s all right and not to be an
ass all his life. Tell him we’re all on his side, and if there’s going
to be any being sick that we’re all going to be sick together and in one
corporate body, or words to that effect. Poor young devil. And I know
he’ll be feeling this, because I had a sort of eye on him in France, and
he seemed as sensitive as a violin string----”

“And drink’s made him worse now. He’s almost certain to be nearly
speechless to-night. But I’ll see.”

“Lord, O Lord, what a mess Barty left behind him! But you see what I
mean? All you’ve got to tell young Gerald is not to make a mountain of
this in his mind, as it’s the sort of thing that might happen to any one
who is ass enough to go into the Park at night without an escort, and
you never know but they mightn’t one night arrest the Bishop of London
himself for saying ‘How do’ to his aunt....”

Now I have read in books about people “sailing” into places, and I
suppose Iris came into the deserted Bar like that. Hilary must have been
just behind her, for I heard his voice, but I only saw Iris, and I
remember how she seemed to hold the white ermine round her with one
clenched hand, and how the great emerald shone like a green fly on the
soft, soft white. And the tawny curls danced their formal dance on her
cheeks as she came towards us, swiftly, oh swiftly, saying, in that
suddenly strong, clear voice: “Oh, Guy ... and friend of Gerald! Will
you help me, dear friend? I want to go round to see Gerald, and Hilary
says you still have the key of the house. I went hours ago, but I could
get no answer at the door. I wonder, would you come with me?”

“Iris,” said Guy sternly, and I remember the way she threw back her head
to look at him, and I thought again of the queer, unconscious way she
had of always meeting men on their own ground. “Why don’t you ever look
up your old friends when you’re in London, Iris? Or aren’t we your old
friends? Or is that fine representative English gentleman, Colonel Duck,
your old friend? Answer me yes or no.”

“Oh, Guy!” she said softly, sadly. “I wouldn’t have you be a humbug. I
wouldn’t have you and Hilary be humbugs--you two, out of all the world.”

“But, honest, Iris, I’d like to see you. Ask Hilary. ‘Where’s that girl
got to?’ I asks, and he says ‘hm,’ says he, if you see what I mean.”

“Whereas I, Guy, have learnt not to regret old friends. I’ve become an
old woman on my travels, and one of the first things an old woman must
learn is that the best way to keep old friends is not to see them, for
then you can at least keep the illusion that they are friends ... which
is, perhaps, a little different from being ‘old friends’....”

“Iris, don’t be so bitter!” snapped Hilary. That, I thought, came rather
well from Hilary. Just at that moment a woman screamed from the
swimming-bath, there was a resounding splash. Guy was saying: “You’d
better take Gerald away for a while, Iris.”

“If he’ll only come,” she said, “that’s what I want to do....”

I remember thinking just then that I mustn’t forget to thank her for
that beautiful notepaper, and also to ask her what was that last word in
her note.

“I’ve got an idea,” Hilary was saying, in the specially detached voice
he keeps for ideas, “that now we _are_ in this foul night-club we might
as well do a bit of good. There’s old Pollen upstairs, and we might ...
hm, well, perhaps not.”

“Perhaps not what, Hilary?”

“Hm. I was thinking of Eve seeing the thing in to-morrow morning’s
papers. She only reads one wretched picture-paper, and that’s Pollen’s,
so I thought, hm, that if we asked him not to....”

“Eve, the poor darling!” Iris whispered. We seemed to be in a desert,
three shadows of men, three shadows of voices, and Iris, very white and
alight. That is how I always remember her, alight.

“No good, Hilary,” Guy was murmuring. “He won’t, because it’s what those
fellows call News. And if you try you will only upset young Venice and
make her perhaps feel she’s in the other camp, rather the wrong camp for
her, she might think, and just as she’s marrying Naps. She’s a good
girl, loyal as anything to her father--and he’s a good fellow enough,
but he’s got a queer complaint called Consistency. It’s something you
make money out of, I think. I know him very well, as I’ve blackballed
him from three clubs. My God, ever seen the man’s jaw?”

“She’s lovely, I thought,” Iris said.

“Good girl, Venice....”

“Hell ...” said Iris suddenly, breathlessly.

“What?” Hilary jumped.

“Only ... hell is raving with millionaires with jaws like Mr. Pollen’s.
I’ve dreamt, I know. People who snap ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ very brusquely and
then stick to it, no matter what it is. This century likes them like
that. Come along, my friend, come along!”

And in a trice Iris and I were walking up the long passage which
connects the Loyalty Club to the pavement of Pall Mall. On one side it
is hung (but this is two years ago) with glass cases laden with fine cut
jades and ambers, while small blue and green figures of animal men,
human animals, and bestial gods will delight the eyes of Egyptologists:
on the other the faces of beautiful women and children will testify to
the photographic art of Sebastian Roeskin of Dover Street. Iris walked
swiftly, heroically, her eyes intent before her, impersonal, utterly
unself-conscious. The glaring lights in the passage lit her
swiftly-moving green-and-silver shoes, or were they sandals with high
heels? and so intent were the flippant silver-flashing ankles, briskly
striding on, as though chiming the never-to-be-known marching song of a
lady who must always meet men on their own ground.

She said: “You’ll be wondering how I came to dine with a man like Victor
Duck. Well, I’ve been wondering myself. Poor Victor Duck. He has taken
to caddishness like a drug, and he goes on increasing the doses. It’s
almost fascinating to watch, just to see what inevitable things he will
say next. And he said and did them all, every one, even to ‘Dear little
girl’ and to ordering a private room. But I said I never dined in
private rooms on Fridays.”

There was a group of tall young men at the entrance, maybe waiting for
their women from the Cloak-Room, maybe waiting for sirens to come to
them from the night, maybe waiting for taxicabs, maybe only waiting for
the next minute, as young men will. Admirably formal they looked,
admirably toned to the dress-coats of Davies, the trousers of Anderson
and Sheppard, the hats of Lock, the waistcoats of Hawes and Curtis, the
ties of Budd. Handkerchiefs by Edouard and Butler. The glory to God.
They looked furtively at Iris in the way that decent men will at a woman
who is said to have had lovers, like cows at a bull. One of them said
gloomily: “Might go to the Albert Hall Ball.”

Pall Mall seemed wrought of stately marble palaces, and Iris said that
the reason why so many English people seemed to prefer Paris to London
was that English people saw Paris mostly at night, while if they could
see enough of London by night they would never leave it. “And the
people!” she said. “All these years I’ve spent abroad, and never met any
people so good, so decent, as the English. Couldn’t you sometimes kill
people for the _quality_ of their admiration? Oh, I’ve committed so many
murders in foreign streets....”

“But, if you like England ... why are you going away? You’re free....”

“Ah,” she mocked, and, as we walked, a hand darted out from her white
cloak and touched my sleeve, and startled me very much. “Wait till
you’re so free that you just daren’t do what you like. Wait till you’re
so free that you can be here one minute and there another. Wait till
you’re so free that you can see the four walls of your freedom and the
iron-barred door that will let you out into the open air of slavery, if
only there was some one to open it. Ah, yes, freedom....”

Then up the street of ghostly dandies we flew behind the silver stork,
and the wind rushed down from Hampstead Heath and the wind ran out of
Jermyn Street and jumped like a drunken man on the tawny cornstalks that
were her hair, and waved them about and danced with them. But not she to
notice, she who seemed to have a great talent for just not noticing
things! She was silent, serious, intent. The light of an arc-lamp kissed
the long slender legs into silver.

Once she turned to me, smiled, and looked away again. I wondered if she
meant me to see that our friendship was in that smile. I hated her, I
think, because she made me feel so incapable, unwise. As the stork, with
scarcely a rustle of its wings, flew towards the Christian Science
Chapel at the head of Half-Moon Street, she said: “I’m tired. All day
seeing lawyers and trustees, and then taking sweet old Eve all round and
round Selfridge’s because she had never been there before and some one
had told her she could find everything she wanted there. And she was
quite upset at being unfaithful to Harrod’s.... And Gerald! Oh, but why
couldn’t they let Gerald alone! Just because, I suppose, the Marches are
never let off anything....”

“Here we are,” I said, and she pulled up beneath the lamp by The Leather
Butler in East Chapel Street. From the footboard a lane of low houses
and shops stretched in a vague, squalid line towards the open Market
Place at one end and the darkness of the mews at the other; somehow
like an etching in a clouded light by an uncertain hand. Bits of
newspapers and torn placards, the nameless odours of yesterday’s
economies. The wind that came from Hampstead Heath could find no way
into Shepherd’s Market, and it lay still as a tramp sleeping. Cats
watched us intently from the middle distance, and a striped cat leapt
with a scream from the shadow of the door of my old house. Gerald’s
light was on. “What’s that mean?” Iris whispered. She seemed to be
frightened, and she said sharply: “Why are you looking at me like that?”

“I was just thinking,” I told her, “that if one could judge by
appearances, which of course one must never do, in that white cloak in
this mean lane you look as nearly an angel as this world could ever
see.”

“Don’t let’s mock the angels. What does it mean, Gerald’s light being
on?”

“Only what it has always meant, that I must turn it out.”

“Ah, you’ve been very good to Gerald....”

And I am glad that, just then, I said that I was very fond of Gerald.

Then we were on the narrow landing of my old flat, in the darkness. The
musty stillness of that little old house brought six years of nights
into my mind, and I wondered how people ever regretted their first
youth, those intolerable uncertainties and enthusiasms that stare at you
from the dead past like condemned gargoyles. The incapability of youth
goes on long enough, Heaven knows, if not so long as the savagery of
childishness. In the darkness I could feel the soft ermine of her cloak
against me, and that faint dry scent whose name I shall now never know.
She was very, very still, and I could not even hear her breathing.

“It is very kind of you to come with me,” she said suddenly, seriously.
We were very still on that landing, and I drew back my arm where it
touched her cloak. It was very soft, that cloak. “I have thought of you,
and decided that if you ever thought of me you had a right to think with
dislike....” She was talking smoothly, calmly, when suddenly her voice
completely broke, into little bits. “Oh!” she whispered. I was silent.
She said quickly: “To me there’s something terribly indecent about
humanity, all humanity. It’s as though, in the whole lovely universe,
humanity was cooped in this musty little house, talking vaguely of
dislike, eternally talking of like and dislike, love and unlove, of
doings and undoings, purposeless yet striving and savage. The other
night I was motoring alone from Paris to Calais, and it seemed to me
that no law was strong enough, no crime was big enough, not even
disloyalty, to stop us, when we had the chance of rising above the
beastly limitation of living as we were born to live. Because we humans
are not born to live, we are born to die....”

“Something has happened to you to-night,” I said. She was a faint white
shape in the darkness, and it seemed to me that that was as much of her
as I should ever see; and I was right.

“No, nothing at all. Just a dream. But, oh, failing the dream, how I
would like a child!”

“A dream-child!”

“Ah, I’ve had those, a many! No, a real one. To be playmates with....”

I said: “I will go up first to-night and see how Gerald is. Will you
wait here?”

“I’m tired and frightened,” she said faintly. “Don’t be long.”

I don’t think I stayed up there more than a few seconds. I don’t know. I
switched out the light, and as I went down the dark narrow stairs I did
not strike a match.

“Well?” she whispered from the darkness.

I don’t know what I said. I suppose I must have said that he was in the
same state as when she had seen him before. Then I pretended I had no
matches left, and said I had better go down first while she held on to
my shoulder. “Then if you fall, I’ll fall,” she complained, but I said I
would not fall.

Stair by stair we slowly descended in the darkness. I wanted
particularly to see Guy. There were certain things to be done, I
supposed. My mind was vacant as a plate on which was drawn a confused
picture that would, on looking closely, mean something horrible. There
had been a stain on the wall, a great jagged dripping stain, and bits of
hair sticking to it.

“Oh, God, this drink!” she said frantically; then almost sobbed: “What’s
that!” But it was only the telephone-bell from the hall downstairs,
queerly strident and unrestrained in that still, musty little house.
Brrr! Brrr! Brrr!... “I never knew a telephone could be so shrill! Will
it be some one for Gerald?”

“It will ring for ever if I don’t answer it,” I said, opening the door
into the lane. “I’ll follow you to the car.” I hoped it was Guy ringing
up on the chance of catching us.

“Well?” his cold murmur came through the night. He said he would meet me
at my door in ten minutes’ time. “What are you doing about Iris?” he
asked me and I think I said: “Nothing. What can I do?”

Iris was waiting by her car under the lamp. The car was like a great
yellow beast with shining scales, and Iris, tall and gentle and white,
the lovely princess of the tale who has enslaved the beast. Far above
them towered the pile of Sunderland House, enchanted almost into dignity
by the darkness. She looked at me gravely as I came, she seemed to
crouch like a tired fairy into her white cloak.

“You look very white,” she said.

“Now, Lady Pynte!” I made to mock her, and I suppose we laughed. Then
she was at the wheel, sunk into the low seat, staring up at the darkness
of the faint London stars. “I’m tired,” she said again, and again I
thought, what could I do? Then she did something to the dash-board with
her left hand, and the engine hummed. I was on the curb, above her.
Nearby a policeman was flashing his lamp on a door. I supposed one told
the police....

“Will you see Gerald in the morning?” the slightly husky voice just
reached me. “And tell him to follow me to Paris? I shall be at
number -- Avenue du Bois for a week or so, and then ... Good-bye,” she
said sharply, as though impatient with herself. “Good-bye, dear. You’ve
been very kind--to the twin Marches. Good-bye ... perhaps for a long
time. You have your work in England, and I’m the slave of freedom.
Good-bye, my friend.”

I could not tell her just then. She lay aslant in the driving seat, and
her tawny curls flamed in the light, and she looked sad and tired. I
could not tell her, and as she took her hand from mine the great car
leapt down the fat little slope of East Chapel Street to the end, turned
in a blaze of light and colour, rushed up the parallel little street to
Curzon Street.

I was at the corner where I had last seen Gerald putting his shoulder
against the saloon-door of The Leather Butler; and as Iris’s car turned
into Curzon Street a two-seater passed me swiftly, going the same way. I
thought I heard a cry of “Iris!” above the rustle of the two engines,
and I thought I heard Iris’s surprised voice, and the rear-lights of the
two cars seemed to draw together, but I was not sure.

I crossed towards Queen Street, sure only that I wished to see Guy. From
Jolley’s corner I saw, far up, two red rear-lights twisting into South
Audley Street, and then, from afar, came the scream of a Klaxon, the
growl of a horn. I wondered who was in the two-seater, but at that
moment the tall figure of Guy came towards me from my door, where a taxi
had just dropped him. “Sorry,” he murmured. “Poor young devil. Only hope
the other side won’t disappoint him as much.”

“I couldn’t tell her,” I said.

Guy smoked thoughtfully, looking over my head. “I’ll tell her,” he said,
“in the morning. Had an idea he might blow his brains out.”




CHAPTER FIVE: THE DARK LETTER


I

On a bitter afternoon in the last week of January of the year 1923 the
writer found himself in the Place Vendôme in Paris.

Now here, in the Place Vendôme, is material ready to the hand of the as
yet undiscovered chronicler of lofty frivolities: such, unfortunately,
as am not. But I can, at least, count up to fifty. There were
forty-eight motor-cars in the Place Vendôme, and one coach-and-six.

The Place Vendôme is a paradox in grey stone. Spacious, noble,
monumental, it is cast, even at the stranger’s first glance, in an
everlasting mould. The Place Vendôme is, without a doubt, one among the
few things about which we may say with certainty: “That will last.” And
yet, monumental and everlasting though it is, what do we find in the
Place Vendôme? Do we find therein the practice of the seven arts, the
learning of the nine humanities, the study of any one among the august
array of sciences, nay, the application of any one among the Ten
Commandments? We do not. We find forty-eight motor-cars and one
coach-and-six. We find that it is given over only to the frivolities of
the trivial of two worlds and to every sort of “high-minded depravity”
that may occur to the enfeebled wits of the exquisite. We find, in
other words, that the Place Vendôme is the centre of that floating
population of a few thousand dressing-tables, sables and Cachets Faivre
of which, under the lofty title of _l’aristocratie internationale_, the
Chevalier Gilulio di Risotto is the ultimate servitor. The Place Vendôme
is, therefore, no place for a plain man, nor by any means a safe station
for the man in the street: there are motor-cars kept in readiness to run
them over.

Across the Place, from the rue de la Paix to the rue de Castiglione,
dash for ever the nimble green Citroën taxicabs; whilst from the rue de
Castiglione to the rue de la Paix will march the Renaults _de luxe_ with
scarlet wheels, passing in a fancy of cool brown eyes and the _poudre à
la maréchale_ of Bourbon days. Here and there among them, maybe, will
flash the racing Bugattis of the dark young men a _giggolo_, a
_rastaqouère_, a “racingman.” They will come to no good.

And always the great column on which Napoleon stands rises to the
clouds, but no one cares about that. All they care about are the
forty-eight automobiles and one coach-and-six which stretch, in ordered
array of two lines, from the foot of his column to the entrance of the
Ritz. The shops are loaded with diamonds as large as carnations and with
carnations as expensive as diamonds. The shop-keepers are very polite,
and courteously do not mind how many you buy. Americans buy. Englishmen
watch the Americans buying. Grand Dukes wait for the Englishmen to dare
them to have a cocktail. A few Frenchmen are stationed at those
strategic points where they can best be rude to the English and
Americans. Then the English and Americans tip them. The women do not
wear stays, and insist on their men shaving twice a day.

“Well, at last!” sighed my sister, as her car, colourless with dust, was
added to the forty-eight. I had been in Europe for four months, had
lately joined some friends at Cannes, had chanced on my sister there,
and had motored back with her to Paris. We were foul with dust, numbed
with cold, aching with tiredness, and this was because we had “done” the
six hundred odd miles from Cannes in two days and a few hours. The devil
was in it if there was any reason why we should not have taken three
days, or four, or five. But, then, why do people say “’phone” for
“telephone”? Thus, they get an illusion of speed.

We went into the hotel. The long, narrow, crimson lounge was crowded
with tea-drinkers. “But what a crowd of women!” said my sister. But
there were quite a few people in men’s clothes. _Au Réception._

“I-want-a-room-and-bathroom-please,” my sister said.

“_Madame?_” The dark-suited gentlemen of the _Réception_ looked up from
their desks at my sister, saw that her clothes were not bad and that she
was in a hurry, and looked away again.

My sister repeated herself, in that dead and faintly aggressive tone in
which women ask for what is very probably going to be denied them. “I
wired,” she added. Liar.

I went towards the concierge’s box. He was a nice man, and had a white
imperial.

“Is Mrs. Storm staying in the hotel?”

“Sir?”

“Could you tell me if Mrs. Storm is----”

“No, sir, no, sir. Not at present, sir.”

“I thought that, as her car was outside.... A yellow Hispano.”

“That is so, sir. _Parfaitement. L’Hispano jaune._”

“But Mrs. Storm, you say, is not in the hotel?”

“No, sir. Not at present, sir.”

“Then, perhaps you may know, she has sold or lent her car to some one?”

“That is so, sir. Madame _a prêté l’Hispano. Merci, monsieur._”

“You couldn’t possibly give me any idea of Mrs. Storm’s present
address?”

“_Pardon, monsieur.... Timbre, monseigneur? De quinze centimes, un.
Merci, monseigneur. L’automobile à huit heures moins quart?
Parfaitement, monseigneur...._ I have no instructions, sir. That was the
gentleman to whom madame has lent her motor. _Le due de Valaucourt._”

“Thank you. But Mrs. Storm, you say, is in Paris?”

“Sir? _Je suis sans instructions, monsieur. Madame?_”

“What is it, what is it?” asked my sister.

“Nothing,” I said. “Got a room? Good. I am going to the Westminster, and
I’ll come at half-past eight, shall I, and take you out to dinner?”

“Yes, but not here. It’s crowded with minor royalties that you can’t
stand with your back to any one except the orchestra. Larue?”

She had no sooner turned towards the lift than my name was cried in an
agony of exultation. My sister says that my face as I started round was
a face of fear.

“Only the other day,” cried Mr. Cherry-Marvel, exercising, with
incredible perfection of gesture, his eyes, shoulders, hands, wrist,
beautiful teeth, tie-pin and handkerchief, “we were talking about
you....” But it was ever one of Mr. Cherry-Marvel’s many social charms
that, the instant he saw you after an absence, he would make it his
business to give you the impression that people had been interested in
nothing else but you during your absence. Not, of course, that he
stopped there; he had other things to say, too. “Of course what I
_really_ must tell you first of all, is that Henri Daverelle, whom, of
course, you know as well as I do, was saying to me only the other day,
_à propos_ of something which I am positive that you, with your sort of
mind, will appreciate at its full value....”

Cherry-Marvel was an artist enslaved by his art: he could not see you
but he and you must instantly fall under its dominion; for it was an art
too perfectly modulated to admit of hurry, it was an art too sensitive
to admit of interruption. Indeed, a wicked little gleam would flash
across his wicked old eyes if you so much as made to interrupt him.
Pitiless to himself, he was only the less pitiless to you in so far as
you were not himself; and, should you be a boor and leave him suddenly,
you might hear the dry, clear voice dying in the distance, but dying
hard, rising and falling to the fullest and most pregnant sense of each
period; for his, you understand, was an art not of selection but of
detail, and must always and be continually expending itself....

“Ava Mainwaring, whom, of course, you know as well as I do, was saying
to me only the other day, _à propos_ of something which I am positive
that you, with your sort of mind....”

Essentially an aristocrat, in person dainty, neat, fastidious,
Cherry-Marvel’s art was essentially democratic, for it abhorred all
limitations and exacted from him its complete display on every occasion,
whether lofty, literary, or plebeian, which came before his relentlessly
alert eyes; and you can hear, through the last sixty years of English
social history, the rise and fall of Cherry-Marvel’s voice, each word
dropping on a stunned silence like a long-polished jewel. Eager,
exquisite, always prepared, always with a handkerchief fluttering
between his breast-pocket and the corner of his eye, you must imagine
him against the tapestry of wasted time, a figure of ancient, æsthetic
_dandysme_, on immaculate lawns, in drawing-rooms, up and down terraces
of palazzos, in clubs and cabarets. You might enter a spacious
drawing-room in Rome, a museum in Naples, a friend’s villa in Capri, you
might stray from your boat in a South Sea lagoon into the smoking-room
of the hotel, you might steal a moment from your companions to see the
moonlight on the Pyramid.... Oh, you might be anywhere, and suddenly you
would hear that voice, rising and falling, relentless, ageless,
enchanting even lions to silence, with here and there a sudden, profound
drawl on one word, any word, “de-ar,” and you would, fascinated, be
compelled to face him--there, with full pale lips drawn wide apart,
wicked blue eyes absorbed with cunning ecstasy in your stunned
attention, the while, infinite as fate, he joined together the perfected
pieces of his art with the word “whereupon,” which lounged from his
tongue in a crescendo to a cry of sadic exaltation. And while you
laughed at some elaborately phrased conceit, wondering how he had
remembered the order of the words so well, he would watch the effect of
his art with kind, cunning eyes, one wrist suspended in the air, his
handkerchief fluttering towards the corner of his eye, in consummate
politeness to show how he, too, by your laughter, was appreciating the
full flavour of his art ... “whereupon Elsa, who, by the way, had really
a very amusing experience in Venice last Autumn, and one which I am
positive that you, with your sort of mind....”

Now, if any one could tell me where Iris was to be found, Cherry-Marvel
was that man. Cherry-Marvel knew, of course, everybody, and he knew
everything about everybody ... “of course it’s absurd to suppose that
Alice, with her intelligence, which I am positive makes its full appeal
to you--it is absurd to suppose that Alice could for one _moment_ have
thought that her husband, whom of course you know as well as I do, would
divorce her for going to Brighton with Cubby Tyrell, because, as I was
pointing out to her sister only the other day, for one thing no decent
man, and I am sure you will agree with me about this, would care to let
it be known that his wife had ever gone to Brighton, and for another,
and this, of course, is a Biblical detail which I am sure that you will
grasp at once, Cubby Tyrell, who is a very intimate friend of mine, has
been allowed, in spite of having been married twice, to remain a member
of the Celibates Club....”

At this time I hadn’t the remotest idea as to where Iris was or how she
did. I had not seen her since the night of her brother’s death; and had
been permitted to gather from Hilary that he knew as little as I did of
her whereabouts. Secret she had always been in her absences, Hilary
said, or, rather careless, but now she seemed positively in hiding.

She had, a few weeks after that terrible night, written me one long
letter: from some place near Rome, from a draughty house, so she wrote,
on a hill of strangled olives. There was no address on the notepaper,
and this, she wrote, was because she did not want me or any one to write
to her. “Please,” she added to that.

Her letter was presumably in answer to two of mine addressed to the care
of Mrs. Oden of Montpellier Square, but she was at the pains to excuse
it on the ground that she and I were tied together--“no, tied
apart!”--by a bond, the existence of which I would never, never know.
Well! It was, you can see, a feverish, mysterious letter; and made how
much more mysterious by that almost illegible, pencilled scrawl! There
were whole sentences on the first few pages which I could not make out
at all, which I made almost blind guesses at, while at some I could not
even contrive so much.

“It is your fault, my friend. You paved the road up which I raced in
chase of the Blue Bird. Yours was the appointed dark finger in the
darkness. May God forgive you, for I can’t. I will try, but I think I
can’t. There is a waterfall of fire....”

Sheets upon sheets of it, that letter is before me now, and still I am
unable to decipher whole sentences from that maze of pencil-marks on the
thin Italian paper. There was one that stared at me, shocked me, in the
middle of the second page--“I may hate you”--but I could not, do what I
would, make out the words above or below.

“...I am lonely beyond bearing, and afraid. I am so afraid. I wonder,
will you understand? But if I bore you take courage, for I will not bore
you again. You are my friend, and this is my good-bye. Forgive me, dear,
the arrogance of calling you my friend. But I am so afraid. _Et, satyr
bien-aimé, j’ai raison...._”

I could, you can understand, make neither head nor tail of it. She might
hate--me! She might, heaven knew, be indifferent to me, but why, how,
hate? And _satyr bien-aimé_ was all very well, but it meant nothing.

On the later pages she seemed to have controlled her hand a little, but
her mind, if one might judge, remained ... well, was that, perhaps, the
effect on a mind of a draughty house on a hill of strangled olives? “I
am lonely, but I have always been lonely since I was eighteen. Yes, I
can trace my loneliness since then. It is a long time.”

This letter, you must remember, came only a month after Gerald’s death.
She wrote of that night, and here her haunted pencil was at its most
firm, if that is saying anything. “There I stood in the old, old
darkness--how old darkness is, have you ever felt?--while you were
upstairs in Gerald’s room. And I listened, but I could not hear you
moving, so I imagined you to be staring at Gerald from the door, as you
and I did that night a million years ago, when, do you remember, you
suddenly, strangely from your heart, made that defiant courtesy to my
hand? And, do you know, I almost cried because of your kindness to that
poor, helpless sweet. Oh, Hilary has told me about you, and you luring
Gerald off to a Home, but all in vain, my poor Gerald. And then I heard
you switch out the light, and down you came, slowly, slowly, more silent
than the darkness, and when you spoke your voice was as old as the
darkness. But you are very young really, else you couldn’t be so
defiantly, so imperiously, kind. And I remember wondering why you said
you had no matches left, for before you went upstairs I had seen a box
half-full in your hand, but I said to myself: ‘He has forgotten, and he
is wretched at his friend’s weakness.’ Ah, you should have told me about
Gerald there and then, indeed you should! But you did not, for my
unworthy comfort’s sake. Dear, you have a fine touch for the
affections--but cruel, that is what you were, cruel. You laid your foot
down on the soil of kindness, but where your foot fell there leapt up a
dandelion ... and in the heart of the dandelion a tiny little rose; but
what, my friend, is one little rose surrounded to suffocation by a huge
dandelion?”

Well! Puzzle this way, puzzle that way, I couldn’t make a glimmer of
sense out of that passage. I was pleased, of course, that she seemed to
like me, but as to the rest....

Guy, as he had told me he would, had been to see her early in the
morning. He had--another friend of childhood--overruled Mrs. Oden,
saying it would be better not to wake Iris and bring her downstairs at
that hour, for could there be a better place than bed in which to
receive bad news? Mrs. Oden knew him of old, he was Apollo Belvedere to
Mrs. Oden. She had been desperately upset about his news, coming as it
did on top of what she had read about Gerald in that morning’s paper.
Poor Mrs. Oden.

Iris was asleep--“Oh, as no man can ever know sleep!”--when she awoke
dimly to a tall shape at the foot of the bed. (“As no man can ever know
sleep!” That, too, puzzled one, as well it might.) Dark it was, the
curtains drawn, “and I remember them flapping peevishly because the door
behind the tall shape was ajar. And I, scarcely awake, could think but
of one thing, my awakening mind was hugging, in pain and joy, but one
thing ... and I called the shape at the foot of the bed by a certain
name, a name which was not his name. He made no sign that he had heard
the name which was not his name, and I am sure he instantly made himself
forget it. For, as you know, Guy would defend a secret not only against
the angels of God, but also against himself. ‘Guy!’ I cried at last,
and he seemed to smile faintly, like the handsome absent-minded god he
is. ‘Yes, Guy,’ he said. ‘Sickening, isn’t it?’ Those high good looks of
Guy’s, that small poised head--frozen, tireless Guy! But that morning he
was very gentle with me....”

He had spoken for me, too, saying that I hadn’t told her of Gerald’s
death at the time because she had looked so tired and sad. “Poor Iris,”
Guy had said, “the men who don’t know you very well care very much for
your comfort, but the three young men who have known you best of all
have not cared enough.” Guy had said that, and she lying in bed,
stunned, staring, while he sat holding her hand, as he might be an elder
brother and she a hurt baby.

“He knew, you see, that I loved Gerald, that Gerald was a part of me,
although Gerald had spent ten years in pretending that he hated me. Do
you think, my friend, that I would have let myself be crucified on Boy’s
death only for the sake of Boy’s cruel relations and friends? Two people
Gerald worshipped in the world, but always he would have sacrificed Iris
to Boy, that was always the way of Gerald’s heart. Above all things in
this world I love the love that people have for each other, the real,
immense, unquestioning, devouring, worshipful love that now and then I
have seen in a girl for a boy, that now and then I have seen in a boy
for a boy, that playmate love. It isn’t of this world, that playmate
love, it’s of a larger world than ours, a better world, a world of
dreams which aren’t illusions but the very pillars of a better life.
But in our world all dreams are illusions, and that is why the angels
have crows-feet round their eyes, because they are peering to see why
all dreams in our world should be illusions.

“But you can’t, you see, get rid of the funny love between twins like
Gerald and me just by the word ‘hate.’ Even Boy couldn’t really upset
that. There was something peculiarly _us_ about Gerald and me, something
of blood and bone peculiarly us which nothing but death could destroy.
And so Mrs. Spirit was sent into Hyde Park that the thing that was us
might be for ever destroyed.”

She had suddenly asked Guy, half-sitting on the bed beside her, what it
was in the world he loved most, and he had said he was sorry to admit
that he loved his son more than all the world. “I could have killed him
for jealousy, just then I could, he who had everything to have also
that. You don’t know the body-ache for a child, the ache that destroys a
body ... the lament for a child of love, a child of lovers....

“He would be two and a half years old now, my son. Hector, you see,
didn’t know anything about his son, because he left me in a temper
before even I was certain. And naturally when I was certain I wasn’t
going to be outdone in silliness by my own husband, and besides, I
thought it would be mean to force him to come back if he didn’t really
want to come back, and so I didn’t let him know. For men, I would have
you know, might make an awful row and stamp away in a tearing jealous
fit, and when they are away they might be as pleased as anything to
have got away. You can never tell about men, especially when they are
convinced that they are being genuine. But, of course, I knew he would
rush back quickly enough when the baby came. Oh, I would see to that!
And, my dear, the fun I would have all by myself, for Hector and I had
always longed for a son, the fun I had thinking of the look on his face
when one day he would get my wire in Ireland: ‘Arrival of
Hector-not-so-proud. You come too.’ Can you imagine what he’d look like
then, and he stern and handsome and all covered with V.C.’s and
oddments, wasting his time chasing disgusting Sinn Feiners who wouldn’t
know a country of their own if they saw it. I had that wire all nicely
written out months beforehand, and I went and hid my ugliness in my old
nurse’s home near Peterboro’ and stuck the wire with a pin over my bed,
being superstitious, you see, and wanting a winner for once in a way.
Well, and then--Oh, and then they killed Hector just in time, and when
Hector-not-so-proud came along he thought, the poor sweet, that the
proper way for a gentleman to arrive in the world was toes first to slow
music, and so away he had to go again....

“I have done with England, and England has done with me. But I don’t
think I shall be able to go and have tea with the Empress of China yet
awhile, for just now I love England as I never before have loved it. The
captains and the kings of England--clean eyes, long shadows, low voices
... why, I must hover, held in running as in a nightmare. And from the
distance, from these lands of loud shrill voices, I will hear the low,
low voices that I had long since thought I had given up regretting.
Indeed, I was quite sure I had given up regretting them. But I am
regretting them now, like a baby. Good-bye, dear, and God bless you. And
when you think of me think instead of your words, ‘He has, with you,’
and you will have the sum of my pride in being liked by you.”

Often, during these past eight or nine months, that scrawled writing
would pass my mind, but as I could hit on no clue to her fantasies, and
as I might never see her again, I had put Iris carefully away into that
part of our minds wherein we keep fancies, images, regrets, the things
that we will do one day, the things that we would like to do one day,
the things that we will never do again ... when, but a moment ago, the
great yellow car had leapt from the Place Vendôme into the first place
in my mind, and I would like, I thought, to learn from my friend,
Cherry-Marvel, anything that might be learnt about Iris. But as I
listened to him, the way he had said this and had done that and had
heard the other, I wondered how I would ever get the chance to suggest
so much as her name to him. “..._à propos_ of something which I am
positive that you, with your sort of mind....”

We stood, for we had not yet had time to sit down, in the little
reading-room of the Ritz that leads from the entrance-doors, while
stern-faced Americans turned over the pages of _The New York Herald_ on
the long marble-topped table in the centre, and a woman or two sat here
and there absorbed in waiting, and the dowager Lady Tekkleham’s voice
nearby was grimly suggesting to the Baron de Belus that he could not do
better than let her drive him in her coach-and-six to dinner at her
villa at Saint Germain-en-Laye.

Weighed down I was by the chill of my journey and my heavy coat, and
weighed down, too, by the gloom of the early winter evening that was
falling about us, so that my eyes, borne down by Cherry-Marvels
amenities, could scarcely make out the chairs and flowers and vases in
the long courtyard through the windows; and suddenly I fell to wondering
how it had come about that Iris, who loved her proud swift car, had lent
it to a friend, but the instant I mentioned her name Cherry-Marvel’s
little eyes gleamed with fury at the interruption. I was abashed, yet I
would try again, but ... “whereupon Auguste de Maupin, whom, of course,
you know as well as I do....”

But at last I achieved the impossible, in inserting a wedge into the
fabulous monologue, and then I murmured: “Ill? But are you sure, Cherry?
Mrs. Storm is ill?”

But illness appalled Cherry-Marvel, from illness he could not help but
turn away the neat, lined mask of his face, from illness his Florentine
_dandysme_ trembled away in the only unaristocratic emotion I have ever
observed in Cherry-Marvel, the emotion of fear. “Quiet we call Silence,
the merest word of all!” For, appalled by illness though he might be,
his art could always rise to a general view.... He had heard in a
roundabout way that Iris had had a “sort of minor operation----”

“But,” I said--

“Whereupon,” said Cherry-Marvel, his little eyes gleaming for a second
with fury, “what _I_ said was, ‘Operations, where are thy stings?’ for,
as of course you know as well as I do, women are scarcely women without
them, and I have not the faintest doubt that in Lesbos they suffered, if
I may put it like this, from the impolite insistence of their womanhood
even more than if there had been any men there, for as I was saying to
Marc only the other day, _à propos_ of the particular shade in which she
had dyed her hair, men may come and men may go, but the moon, my dear
boy, is always there. Now here, for instance, is Iris, quite one of the
loveliest women I have ever seen, and one who, I am convinced, must be
very fond of you with your sort of mind, here she has, I hear on the
very best authority, fallen a victim to one of those mental derangements
which seem, if I may put it like this, to be an irresistible incitement
to polite surgery in quite another and more individual part of the
person. But what I have always said about Iris is this, that I admire
her so, and I am so positive that you also must, with your sort of mind,
because she is one of the very few Englishwomen I have ever met who can,
as I am sure you will agree with me, live abroad without becoming more
and more English....”


II

Paris rises in a cloud of chill darkness, the rain falls like whips of
ice, the street-lamps loiter on vague, bitter errands, confused strings
of light, a stealthy, idiot wind glories in being corrupted by corners.
The platforms of the omnibuses are packed tight with small men whose
overcoats are too short for them, the brims of their felt-hats too
narrow, their trousers turned up too high, their eyes too dark, their
faces too pale. The jargon of the traffic on the rue de Rivoli, as it
squabbles for every step between the deserted pavement beneath the
railings of the Tuileries and the reeking pavement under the long
archway lit by impudent shop-lights falling on imitation jewellery, is
multiplied an hundred-fold by the shrewish air into a noise that hurts
like warm water on a chill hand.

The taxi, a clever little Citroën taxi, darted hither and thither among
the squabbling hosts, and nimbly we capered across the dark face of the
Louvre, nimbly over the Pont Royal and the river paved with broken
darkness, and so down the slope into the rout of the Boulevard Raspail.

Maybe it is true that there are times when we can detest Paris more
deeply than any other city. Other cities stare back calmly at our sudden
hatreds, other cities grow more impersonal as we execrate them, while as
for Paris, she is always personal, but when we are nervous and detest
her for being Paris she becomes even more herself, she insists on being
herself with a nerveracking insistence, like a silly woman who, seeing
she is getting on her man’s nerves, gives a loud, nervous laugh and
simpers: “I can’t help it, it’s my nature to be like this....”

Now why were the people yelling here, what was the matter? Millions of
them there were, joined in some strife between the Bon Marché, the Hôtel
Lutetia and the entrance of the Nord-Sud railway, while omnibuses and
trams made strategic movements against each other, while _facteurs_ in
dirty blue, fabulously moustachioed, pushed carts about in all
directions, irritating any one they could, and a motionless _gendarme_
or two played with his bâton, heedless, unheeded. The eager face of a
young artist I knew, shadowed by a great black hat, artistic,
anarchistic, strode out of the white mass of the Hôtel Lutetia and
turned greedily towards Montparnasse. At last my clever little Citroën
and I plunged into quieter wastes, lit here and there by the bastard
glitter of a Cinema Theatre falling on posters livid with three colours,
red, blue, and yellow.

That strange unstormy exquisite, Cherry-Marvel! That most æsthetic
creator of a monster more terrible than Frankenstein’s, for it devoured
the spirit of all who passed beside it! Why I should be worried about
Iris I could not tell, indeed I was too tired to inquire, but worried I
was despite Cherry-Marvel’s so well-informed badinage about the white
woman’s burden, and the more worried too, as the taxi plunged into
nameless darknesses beyond the Bal Bullier, towards the address of the
nursing-home which Cherry-Marvel, that confidant at third-hand, had of
course known.

Montparnasse lay somewhere behind, or to the east, or to the west. We
were in unknown Paris, silent, ill-lit, fantastic Paris: silent but for
a rending crash here, a jarring cry there. Cold as the devil it was
now, as though because the prickly warmth of many lamps and shops was
withdrawn. Carefully we traversed a broad avenue as yet scarcely paved,
beneath the skeleton shapes of great tenement-houses. Ah, Paris, that we
should have come to this, you and I! Paris, that we should have come
together down to this! In how many moods you and I have passed the time
of day and night together, we have sat in strange places and dared the
most devilish shadows, we have wandered from the Rotonde to the crowning
grubbiness of the Butte, we have raced in the Bois and up the Mont
Valérien, we have laughed at painted boys and been reviled by painted
women, we have danced, loved, gambled, drunk, and together we have been
bored by the unmentionable and terrified by that which makes the eyes
bright and the face white as a soiled handkerchief, while Mio Mi
Marianne danced a _minuet du cœur_ with a crimson garter and the moon
fell across the French-windows of Berneval’s house to be lost in the
soft shadows of giant poppies. Paris, that we should now have come down
to this, lost together in these nameless darknesses beyond even the low
darkness of the Bal Bullier, that glory of another time than ours....

And now we tore up a dark, endless boulevard, even as a shifty maggot in
a pit of darkness. But surely this was the murderer’s Paris, here lived
the fathers and grandfathers of Apaches, here were born the daughters of
the drinkers of blood and the sons of the mothers of crime. It stretched
never-ending between lamps fixed at astronomical distances, and on each
side tall naked trees thrashed the shadows of very high black walls.
They hid from the world, the people of this boulevard of the high walls,
and who shall say that they had no reason to hide? And then, do you
know, a lion leapt out of the night, a huge lion that was black as sin
and crouched for prey in the centre way between five lanes of darkness
made even darker by confused strings of light. And as we breathed a
prayer in thanks for our deliverance from the lion of darkness trams
crawled near us and stayed a while, and tram, at the impulse of a vice
peculiarly continental, was joined to tram and crawled away; while we,
having regained our breath, came beneath the shadow of a terrible wall.
It was the wall of a castle, a fortress, a something satanically
majestic. This, I thought, is another of Carlyle’s mistakes, this is no
less than the Bastille skulking in these parts until such time as the
Camelots du Roy shall have left the kindergarten and can crown the duc
d’Orleans King of France. Far above our laboured passage glowed a long,
long row of small windows faintly lit, and it seemed to me that they
were striped with bars of iron. And there was a great gate of iron, and
a black soldier with a beastly bayonet to his rifle, and an old woman
with a great brown parcel under her arm, waiting. The clever little
Citroën stopped. It is tired, I thought, and will go on later....

“_Eh, numéro quarante-neuf, Boulevard Pierre Abel?_” the taxi-driver
threw at me reproachfully, and I got out, and I stared up at the great
fortress which towered above me like a beast with a row of unclean eyes
about his forehead, and the rain whipped my face.

“_C’est un prison?_”

“_Mais oui, monsieur. Le Paradis._”

The pavement was broad, of mud and asphalt. The prison towered on our
right, filling the sky with darkness--but for those distant, terrible
windows. The rain whipped down, stinging like little animals. Nearby one
forlorn lamp lit the putrefying colours of the advertisements circling a
_lavabo_. What, I wondered and wondered, could Iris be doing here?
Facing me across the broad pavement of mud and asphalt was a great gate
which had once been brown, lit by a lamp on which had once been
inscribed the number of the Nursing Home. Iris was here. Were we, then,
always to meet in darkness, Iris and I? She was here, and perhaps, I
thought, on the other side of her is a Morgue or an Asylum.

A yard or so from the great door there was let into the high wall a
small door inscribed _Concierge_. I was startled at the clatter made by
the bell. A nun stood in the dim doorway.




CHAPTER SIX: THE RED LIGHTS


I

The shape of her coif against the dim light was like some legendary
thing’s head, and she was eating. I heard her. That she was old and very
stout was all I could see. I could smell just a little, too. Poor Iris.

I asked if I might have news of Mrs. Storm.

“_Ah, la dame anglaise!_” She ate, but not finally. “_Madame est assez
bien, je crois. Mais pardon, monsieur. Je n’ai pas d’instructions à vous
donner_----”

“But!” I pleaded. “But----”

“_Je regrette, monsieur. C’est pas ma faute, vous savez. Pardon._”

She was closing the door! Terse as you like. I was helpless. “_Madame
est assez bien, je crois!_” Dear Heaven, but didn’t one know those
_assez biens_! Isn’t there a company in Heaven wholly recruited from
those who have been _assez bien_, and daily augmented by those who are
_assez bien_!

I lifted up my voice.

“_Pardon, monsieur._”

I lifted up my voice in vain. So I was active. She stared at me,
panting. I withdrew my first impression as to her being a nun. She was
no nun. She had a crucifix and a coif, but she was no nun. She was a
woman scorned. She said many things and used many words which I did not
understand. But I didn’t care. I somehow thought, you know, of Iris
dying.

“I am here,” I said in effect, “and here I stay until I can speak to a
doctor or a matron. I am sorry, but you have made me anxious as to the
lady’s health.”

“_Mais je vous l’ai déjà dit, jeune homme! Madame est assez bien!_”

The ordinary dingy _concierge’s_ lodge: a black stove, a table covered
with frayed red cloth, a chair, a stool, an indescribable odour, a plate
of food on the table--_bœuf bouilli_, which is French for the salvaging
of grey matter from liquid dungeons of onions, carrots and potatoes. I
sat on the stool. It was unbelievable that her coif had ever been white.
Somehow my eyes were transfixed by the small wooden crucifix which, like
a dinghy on a choppy sea, rolled on her bosom as she ate. I wondered how
long I would have to wait. I wondered if I could smoke. I wondered if
this was one of those convent-nursing-homes. I wondered if one called a
nun _madame_ or _mademoiselle_. They were maidens presumably, so I
supposed _mademoiselle_.

“_On peut fumer, mademoiselle?_”

I was wrong. She looked at me with contempt. “_C’est défendu,
monsieur._”

“_Merci, madame._”

I wondered if she really could be a nun. I wondered if one could tip a
nun. Out of sheer hatred one acquires a passion for tipping in France
and Italy. Detestable it was on this detestable day to sit like this,
being hated. I made a muttering noise and gave her a ten-franc note,
and it was in a more amiable spirit that she went on with her salvaging.
At last there were only two bits of carrot and an awful looking onion
left to engage her attention, and I felt that one might perhaps
converse.

I was right about her being no nun. She was a lay-sister, she said. And
this place, she told me, was a convent-nursing-home. “_Nous avons ici_,”
she was pleased to add, “_la clientèle européenne la plus chic_.”

Perhaps that was the worst stroke of that day, so far. Iris among a
_clientèle européenne la plus chic_.... One saw the cosmopolitan
divorcées, their secret illnesses and guileful pains, their nasty little
coquetries and the way they would blackmail their lovers with their
sufferings, and one felt the sticky night-club breath of all the silly,
common harlotries of England, France, America. My poor ten-franc note
must have seemed pathetic to this old lay-sister, who probably thought
nothing of receiving a _mille_ from an anxious Dago.

I had until then been trying not to wonder about Iris in the vile shadow
of a prison. Suddenly I was furiously hot. What on earth was I doing
here! Intruding where I was not wanted! I was about to go, to run, when
the lay-sister was as though distracted from the last piece of carrot by
the opening of a door in the back room. Frantically she hurried towards
it. It would look too silly of me to run now. I could but ask, anyhow.

The lay-sister’s voice, voluble, vindictive, explanatory. Much good my
ten francs had done! Then steps came towards me, into the lodge. “Eh,” I
said. How afraid one always is of the callous French doctors with their
cynical eyes and purple beards....

A man, bald, sharp-featured as a bird, in a rough brown great-coat, a
tired-looking, an anxious-looking, middle-aged--Englishman!

“Masters! Conrad Masters!”

“Well,” muttered that anxious-looking man. He looked just the same when
he was playing bridge. He was always playing bridge, that man. And he
said he hated playing bridge. That kind of man. “Well? How are you?”

“Glad,” I said, “glad it’s no worse. Glad it’s only you. I was afraid of
a purple beard.”

“And how did you get here?” A man given to muttering, that. One could
hear what he said or not just as one pleased. One couldn’t, you
understand, be afraid of Conrad Masters.

“Masters, the fight I’ve had with this Cerberus to see you!”

“Rules ... must have rules, you know....” A decidedly undecided man.
Soft-speaking but not plausible, a combination peculiarly English. A man
of nerves. Shifty without suavity ... and then, suddenly, apt to bite
your head off like a very captain of men: “And how did you know Mrs.
Storm was ill? Here?”

“Oh,” I said. “Well....” And I thought of many things. Of Conrad
Masters, of “Should a doctor tell?” of Cherry-Marvel, that confidant at
third-hand, of Mrs. Conrad Masters. A dashing lady, that.

“Who but Cherry-Marvel told me!” said I.

“God in Heaven, that man!”

But Iris swept out of my mind her doctor’s problematical indiscretions
to his dashing wife....

“Ill,” he muttered. “Decidedly ill.... mm....”

“I heard,” I said desperately, “that she’d had a sort of operation--”

“There’s been no operation!” snapped that captain of men. “Simply
maddens a man, the way these things get about....”

“Well, I’m only repeating what I heard, Masters. And you can’t hope for
secrecy once our friend gets hold of anything--”

“Who said anything about secrecy?” A dangerous, feline muttering. “I
don’t want secrecy....”

Silence. Anxieties walked across it arm-in-arm with that lank man’s
doubtful heat.

“I say, Masters, is she--is she very ill? But, of course, if I’m
intruding....”

Those worried eyes were fixed on the feet stuck far out from the chair
on which he lay as though exhausted. The lay-sister appeared to be
pottering about in the next room. “Thinking of Donna Guelãra, are you?
Haven’t much faith in me and Martel-Bonnard, have you?” Faintly amused
those worried eyes looked to be. That was that man’s way. You would
think he was being shifty with you when he might be just laughing at
you.

Some would speak well, very well, of Dr. Masters; whilst others almost
libellously, saying that, working as he did with Eugene Martel-Bonnard,
the surgeon, he couldn’t be over-scrupulous in advising profitable but
unnecessary operations. Martel-Bonnard’s wife wore a famous pearl rope,
of which it was said that each pearl had been bought at the price of a
woman’s life. But a brilliant surgeon’s life. Martel-Bonnard would say,
is full of drawbacks. He charged accordingly. I think that he and Mrs.
Masters must have bullied Masters every now and then--not that he
wouldn’t have looked worried in the Elysian Fields. Between them, those
three had once made poor Anna Estella Guelãra very sorry she had ever
left Chile. She was quite well, Martel-Bonnard said she was very ill, he
almost killed her, then he saved her, and how he hurt her! “Naturally,”
smiled Martel-Bonnard. “Such things hurt. But, my friend, she
was--_pouf!_--but for me.” How one would have liked to operate on that
sleek little man, unsuccessfully! He despised you if you differed from
him, operated on you if you were fool enough, and robbed you according
to a special system he had of discounting the exchange. One hundred
thousand francs, poor Anna Estella’s life had cost her that time. And
pain, such as falls only to the lot of women!

“But. Masters, it’s surely not as bad a case as that!”

“Mm ... not as bad? Well ... different shall we say?”

“But that was an internal operation! You just said--”

“Quite. That’s why it’s different....”

Talking with Conrad Masters was like playing a game in which he who made
out the most of the other’s words scored the most points.... But Iris
alone here, in this obscure place as full of crucifixes as a cemetery!

“I’m sorry,” I said, rising from the stool. “I’m intruding....”

“You’re all right,” he mumbled. “So you heard about it from that _femme
fatale_, did you? Damn that man! Bla, bla, bla!”

Those worried but faintly amused eyes were on me. “Been hearing quite a
lot about you lately. Nurses would have your _dossier_ complete by now
if they could understand English. You seem to have put your foot in it
somewhere. Rather sorry for you if....”

This bantering ... medical bantering! Only doctors dare do it. “Well,
how are we to-day?” But by paying close attention to the game I had
scored one point. She was delirious. So far, delirious. Then ... “if!”

“Masters,” I said, “are you telling me that she is dying?”

“Mm ...” he muttered impatiently, and as he jumped up from his chair the
rough brown great-coat seemed to fill the dingy lodge. It smelt of
England, that coat. And, protruding from it, that sharp, naked, weary
face with the worried eyes....

“Look here, Masters--”

“Here you are,” he muttered. I could not understand why he muttered.
“Here you are” until I found a cigarette in one hand and one of those
wretched spirit-lighters in the other. A man without conviction even in
his ability to strike a match....

“Known her for years,” he muttered towards his feet. “At Deauville that
year ... terrible for her. Poor child....”

“Masters, you said Donna Guelãra might die. You know you did. But she
didn’t, did she?”

He looked at me sharply. “If only she’d help herself, lift a finger to
help herself! That’s what beats a man. Doesn’t lift one finger, she
doesn’t.”

“Oh!” I said, trying to look reasonable. But I couldn’t, for the life of
me, accommodate myself to the idea of Iris dying. “I suppose this is the
crisis, is it, Masters?”

The rough great-coat gave one vindictive flounce, filled the room.
“Crisis! The way you people talk of crisis this and crisis that! Hear a
word once and stick to it through life! ‘When does the crisis pass?’
There is no ‘crisis’ in most of these infernal things. Malaria,
pneumonia, a few others--yes, crisis, know where you are. But in these
things the patient just continues ill, two, three, four weeks, might
live, might not. Lysis, not crisis. Crisis!”

“Sorry. Lysis....”

“Oh, here!” He suddenly began fumbling in an ancient pocket-book, from
which he extracted a small folded piece of paper. “Might interest you,”
he muttered.

Scrawled in pencil across the slip of paper were what looked like two
names. That indecipherable scrawl! At last I made out the two names:
Hilary’s and mine.

“She said, should either of these two happen somehow to hear I am ill
and call, just be nice to them, please. Her very words....”

“Oh!” I said. And I went on staring at the slip of paper. It was a
rather grubby slip of paper. And those two scrawled names were like a
faint cry of loneliness.

“Known her for years,” Masters was muttering. “Nice! First tells me not
to tell any one, then to be ‘nice’ to you two....”

I gave him back the slip of paper. I don’t know why, and now I wish I
hadn’t. I would like to have it now, beside that fiver. “Nice, fivers
are....” Thoughtful Iris! She knew her friends, she did. Lying lonely
here ... and having an afterthought about Hilary--and me! “If they
should somehow happen to hear and call.” Poor Guy hadn’t a mention. She
wasn’t for putting any strain on Guy’s lawfulness. But why lawfulness? I
looked at Conrad Masters.

“Septic poisoning,” said Masters. “That’s the trouble.”

That meant very little to me, for never was a man so ill-informed about
such things. “But,” I said doubtfully to those gentle-worried eyes, and
he murmured:

“Sure you’re not thinking of ptomaine poisoning? Not that that isn’t
quite enough to be going on with....”

“Pain,” I said. “Good Lord, pain....” All I could think of was pain,
pain, pain. One can almost feel the stabs of some one’s pain. Worst of
all, one can mentally hear the faint screams of a voice just
recognisable. Conrad Masters, the sight of him, reminded me vividly of
Anna Estella’s pain. Once, from a waiting-room, I had heard her
screaming. “Pain?” I said.

“Oh, no ... no.” He weighed the matter. “Nothing to speak of. Just keep
still, that’s the main thing. Very still, for weeks and weeks. Long
business, you know. But what worries a man is that she doesn’t try to
help herself at all. Letting herself go ... can’t tell whether
consciously or not, but somewhere inside her just not caring. I’ve been
sharp with her.... Nice business for me, isn’t it? Good Lord, nice! If
only she’d take a pull, pull herself together ... some one just give her
mind a jab somehow. No good talking, of course. If she won’t, she won’t.
Lies there, you know, just not caring....” He was drawing on a fur-lined
glove, and it was to that he spoke; almost, one thought, shyly. A
curious, complex gentleman. “She’s said once or twice she’d like to see
you and ... well, learn you a thing or two. Some stuff about roses and
dandelions. You seem to have made a _gaffe_ somewhere, and it’s quite on
her mind to tell you about it. Hope I’m not giving anything away ... but
might do her good just to see you, feel you’re round about. You can’t
tell. We’ll see how she is to-morrow. Extraordinary, I’ve found it, the
way a woman will wake up for a second from days of delirium for no other
purpose than to feel lonely.... Not awake now, though. Ill, this
evening. Can’t really, you see, be iller if she tried. It will be good
news, really good news, if she is alive in the morning. That’s as much
as I can say. Sorry.... Well, I must snatch some dinner....”

We were outside. The rain had ceased, it was much warmer. The Masters’s
Renault, sleek and shining black but for the scarlet wheels, dwarfed my
taxi.

Septic poisoning. I began to remember a little about that. I remembered
two words which seemed very like “septic poisoning” in reports of trials
of wretched women who had “operated.” Surely, Masters couldn’t ... she
had, after all, trusted me--“be nice to him”--and I must at once think
the worst thing. Oh, God, how foul a thing a man’s mind is, how foul!
But, Iris, dear Iris, why is one able to think of these awful things in
connection with you!

“There’s always hope, you know,” Masters was muttering. “Pity you kept
your taxi. I could have dropped you. And Donna Guelãra didn’t die, did
she?”

But how Anna Estella had desired to live! “Die, me!” she had later
screamed with laughter.

Iris had trusted me. “Be nice to him”--her very words. And I had thought
that ...

“Masters, you won’t mind my coming round again? Perhaps to-night?”

“Sleep here, if you like,” he smiled. “I’ll be coming myself for a
second, about midnight. Wife’s got a party. Like to come? Rather good
bridge. Well, please yourself....”


II

I agreed with my sister that it was abominably rude of her younger
brother to be nearly an hour late to take her out to dinner, especially
as she had been ready for at least twenty minutes. She was furious. I
said: “There is a new dance place open. I heard about it from a friend
of mine, Mr. Cherry-Marvel. You will meet him, he is charming. This new
place is called _La Plume de Ma Tante_. It has only been open three
nights, so it will be very modish for another two. There is a
nightingale there.”

“One cannot dance to a nightingale.”

“But why are you so exclusive?”

“It is cruel and beastly to keep a nightingale caged.”

“Dear, it takes a woman who once had a passion for aigrettes and who
loves eating lobsters to be so sensitive. But there is probably baser
music to supplement this nightingale. There are, in fact, five lovely
niggers. The place is called _La Plume de Ma Tante_ so that English
people may know exactly where they stand.”

“You are so funny to-night, but would you mind not polishing your shoes
on my dress? This is a very terrible taxi, and I think men are
monstrous. If you were taking any woman but your sister out to dinner
you would have chosen the taxi with discretion.”

“Rudolf and Raymonde are the dancers. I do not want to go to The Pen of
My Aunt, but for your sake I would go anywhere. After dinner.”

She was pleased, loving to dance. We walked up the pavement of the rue
Royale to the quiet doors of Larue. She said: “I love Rudolf and
Raymonde. I saw them dancing at Monte Carlo, and they say American women
give him platinum watches from Cartier and that he was a footman in San
Francisco, or was that Rudolf Valentino?”

I said: “I say, do you know anything about septic poisoning?”

“Really, how callous you are! Do I know anything about it! But I had
it!”

“No!” One’s sister!

“But of course I had it! It is amazing when one’s own brother is quite
unaware that one has been through endless pain and torture.”

“Not pain and torture,” I said. “A little bird told me.”

“But I am not responsible for your feathered friends! I was as good as
dead, that’s all I know.”

“But, my dear, that was when you were having a baby! I was in Vienna.”

“So you said. But, of course, it came on after I had a baby. One does
not get septic poisoning for nothing. I nearly died, I can tell you.”

“_Vestiaire, monsieur?_”

“...Oh, I see. A baby. After that....”

“I have never been so hungry in my life,” my sister said, “and you talk
to me of septic poisoning. I suppose you think you will destroy my
appetite and therefore the bill will be less. I will begin with
caviare.”

“Septic poisoning,” I said, “did not kill you, that is the point. You
cannot imagine how glad I am. Let us eat caviare.”


III

_La Plume de Ma Tante._ Bright green walls splashed with vermilion. A
platform at one end, whereon five blackamoors perspired. At the other, a
naked woman. She was without hips, according to the fashion for women.
Her arms were twined above her head, and raised on the tip of her
fingers was a bowl of green malachite from which pink water splashed
into a white alabaster basin at her feet. Many English people were
present. They would be going to the Riviera, then they would be coming
back from the Riviera. Colonel Duck was there, with the quality. Colonel
Duck was, no doubt, just returned from some notably swift exploits on
the Cresta Run. But he never was so talkative about his outdoor
activities. Cherry-Marvel was there, with a great big woman and a
nice-looking boy with the hands of a housemaid who was a famous boxer.
There was the usual group of Argentines, very well dressed indeed. They
talked about _le polo_. All over the room elderly women were dancing
with young men of both sexes. Mio Mi Marianne was there, sitting alone,
but I might not speak with her because I was with my sister. A
_demi-mondaine_ will feel insulted if you speak with her when you are
with your sister. Two years before Mio Mi Marianne had one night tied a
silk handkerchief round her wrist, and it became the fashion for women
to tie silk handkerchiefs round their wrists. Then Mio Mi Marianne tied
a silk handkerchief round her throat, and that became the fashion. She
thought of these things while smoking opium. She sat alone, staring into
a glass of Vichy Water. A young American polo-player called Blister went
up to her table, and maybe he asked her to dance, but she just looked at
him and he went away again. Her eyes were intent on an opium-dream, and
she was very happy in the arms of the infinite. Mio Mi Marianne will be
found one day lying on the Aubusson carpet of her drawing-room. There
will be a hole in the carpet where her cigarette has died out.

A blackamoor beat a warning roll on his drum, the dancers left the
floor, the lights dwindled and awoke again in swaying shadows of blue
and carmine. A heavily built young man with the face of a murderer
danced a tango with a lovely young girl with short golden curls. Then he
threw her on the floor, and picked her up again. Rudolf and Raymonde. He
did it beautifully. An American woman called the Duchess of Malvern
threw Rudolph a pink carnation. The Baron de Belus said harshly: “That
is a white carnation really, but it is blushing at the fuss that women
make of Dagoes.” In a cage clamped to the bright green wall near us was
a dumb nightingale. It kept pecking at the floor of its cage, looking at
nothing and nobody. I left my sister in Cherry-Marvel’s care. I said to
her that he could dance, and next day she was furious.


IV

The burning eyes of the Renault made the grim Boulevard Pierre Abel
almost hospitable. That was a conscientious man, Conrad Masters. How
glad I was of him at that moment! What had he said about Iris? something
about his having known her for years, something about “that year at
Deauville ... terrible for her.” That would mean, then, that Masters had
been there during the Boy Fenwick tragedy. Iris, poor Iris! Such
punishments ... for what crimes? What crimes deserved such punishments?
Iris, poor Iris! But she wouldn’t mind dying, not she. That was the
trouble, Masters had said. But no doubt she knew best....

The Paradis prison was a pit of blackness in the night. The dim lights
behind the iron-barred windows were out, and it was impossible not to
wonder if they slept up there in their iron cages, the wicked, the
foolish, the betrayed. Perhaps the nightingale in its cage did not care.
Perhaps those up there did not care, and slept like angels. But the
wrongly accused would not sleep, that was certain. Does innocence
wrongly-accused profit any one except a very wise man or a very good
man, except a man who cares nothing for the opinion of this world or one
who cares only for the love of the next? I said to the taxi-driver:
“Hell can know no torment like the agony of an innocent in a cage,” and
when he had carefully examined his tip he agreed with me.

Gently as I could, I rang the bell, praying that the old woman would
not be angry with me.

“_Aha!_” she chuckled. “_Aha! Monsieur-toujours-de-l’audace! Mais
entrez, monsieur, entrez!_ The doctor is just this moment arrived. Truly
he is a good man, this Dr. Mastaire--but our French doctors, you should
see! They come for a moment, they go, and she lives or she dies, what do
they care as long as they are paid? But this English doctor, he does not
know how to make money easily. Madame his wife was this moment
telephoning that he should go home quickly, for they are awaiting him
for _le bridge_. _Ah, cet bridge, bridge, bridge!_”

“But you see how anxious I am! Have you heard anything since I last saw
you?”

“To have heard nothing, young man, is to have heard good news. But sit
down, the doctor himself will tell you in one moment--” That demoniac
bell! It clanged through the place. Perhaps of all the nations in the
world the French alone are capable of fixing the loudest possible bell
to a nursing-home. The fat old woman grinned vindictively at me. We had
been enemies, now we were allies against the intruder. “Bah!” she said,
and opened the door. From where I stood I could not see who was without,
but I could hear a voice: low, hesitating, in very correct French, in
Foreign Office French....

“Napier!” ...

We stared at each other in the most profound surprise and confusion.
Napier, favourite of the gods, shy, sensitive, fine ... just here, just
now, facing me in the obscure silence of the Paris night!

“This is funny,” Napier made to smile. “What?”

Napier Harpenden and I had known each other well, as “well” goes, for
years, but never before had we been alone together. But once, some years
ago, I had seen him in a curious moment. Late one night I was walking
down a villainous alley near the East India Docks when through a lighted
window I was astonished to see Napier’s white, thin, fine face and those
dark fevered eyes. He was talking earnestly to an old man and a very
pretty young girl who was crying, and I felt ashamed to have seen him,
for that is how Napier affected one, you were hurt at the idea of
hurting him. I had wondered often what he could have been doing there,
what secret good work he was at. He was a strange, secret, saintly
youth, a favourite of the gods who never once relied on the favouritism
of gods or men....

He still stood outside, a serious slack shape in a tweed overcoat. He
masked, behind that faint, deprecating smile of his, more than the mere
confusion of surprise. He would very much rather it had not been me he
had met just there. Napier and I were friends only because all our
friends were mutual. We hadn’t ever found, tried to find, any common
ground for friendship. Sincerely, I was very sorry to be there. Napier
had that effect on one.

“Venice is waiting in the taxi,” he said. Whenever Napier and I met he
would instantly speak of Venice. This was to show me that he knew
Venice and I were great friends and that, if he and I weren’t great
friends, that must somehow be his fault. How could you help liking a man
like that? The courtesy of that favourite of the gods went so much
deeper than any one else’s: let it one day go a little deeper, and you
felt that it might have gone a little too deep, down, down to
self-destruction.

I said I had arrived in Paris only that afternoon, and had heard, by
chance, that Mrs. Storm was ill. My presence there seemed, you can see,
to require a more definite explanation than any he might think fit to
give me. One felt, with Napier, uncomfortably familiar to be asking
after Iris in this obscure place at this late hour. He and Iris had been
“kids.” Then I thought, comically, of the two scrawled names on the
grubby slip of paper. Well, I seemed to have rights too. More rights
than Napier, really. Conrad Masters had no instructions to be nice to
Napier. Poor Napier....

“But,” he said, slowly, slowly, “surely she’s better by now? I only just
called on the off-chance ... really wanted air after the train journey
more than anything else. Surely ... what?”

I stared at him. What to say? You see, the sudden, white way he was
staring at me made me feel terribly canny of anything I might say.
Besides, one treated Napier _differently_.

“Better?” I repeated. “Well....”

“But, look here,” he said, protested.... It was dark, there between the
dim lodge and the night. Why on earth didn’t the man come in? “Venice
and I are going south to-morrow, and I just thought I’d inquire--but,
look here, I never dreamt that she....”

I at last grasped the fact that he had known she was ill. He was the
only one among us who had known she was ill. One kid had known that the
other kid was ill ... and had waited until, on his way south, he could
conveniently come round and inquire. Well!

“You had better come in, hadn’t you?” I said. I simply couldn’t say
slap-out that Iris was ill nearly to death. You couldn’t say things like
that to those dark, troubled eyes. You protected Napier from your own
impulses, always. A favourite not of the gods alone....

But he still stood there in the darkness, staring at me very strangely
and scowling in that funny, attractive way he had. Whenever I think of
Napier I can see that Napier scowl and I can hear that involuntary
“what?” he would tack on to questions.

“Look here, something’s the matter.” His voice trembled absurdly....
“Something serious. What?”

“She’s very ill,” I think I said.

“Very!” he snapped. “What? You mean ... really ill? What?”

“I think so,” I said. “Yes.”

I looked into the room, avoiding those eyes. The lay sister, a pair of
horn spectacles on her nose, and without a sign of interest in us, was
mending the heel of a black woollen stocking, one end of which lay
coiled in a black tin box. I couldn’t somehow look at Napier just then.
That, you see, was the first hint I had of the thing, and though it was
no more than a hint, it tore at one. The look in Napier’s eyes, I mean.
The man’s heart was in his eyes....

“Look here,” he said sharply, “I don’t understand this. What? I mean,
I’d no idea it was....”

“I don’t know anything,” I said, “except just that she’s ill.” We stared
at each other.

“As ill,” I said, “as can be.”

“Oh,” he said. His eyes on me, not seeing me, he pushed past me through
the doorway. And when I saw his face again, I was appalled. It was lost,
abandoned, terribly unaware of everything but fear, it was enchanted by
fear. He simply didn’t _care_ but about one thing....

“Haven’t seen her,” he said, and scowled at me. Not that he had, at that
moment, the faintest idea who I was.

“Here, a cigarette,” I said.

He stared at it in his fingers. He crushed it....

“Haven’t seen her for nearly a year,” he said in a rush, and stopped
abruptly, seemed to realise me, scowled. “I say, what is it? Pneumonia
or something? What?”

I fumbled. I wasn’t, I said, certain. Had only seen the doctor for a
moment. Something inside, I thought, had gone wrong....

I was immensely lost in all this. He had known she was ill--but not
seriously ill, nor of what! I grabbed at one certain point of behaviour
for myself. One had to. I was, anyhow, going to make no mischief. Like
Guy, I would give no “gratuitous information” of any sort. For better or
for worse, I wouldn’t. News of septic poisoning was obviously not for
Napier, not for any one--except for the two names on the grubby slip of
paper. This septic poisoning seemed to mean only one of two things, a
child or not a child. That was most utterly Iris’s business. Iris the
desirous--for a child. “To be playmates with.” And I wondered, just
then, if it had been another Hector-not-so-proud. “Like to have a winner
once....” I kept on hearing that slightly husky voice saying little
things.

“What I mean to say is,” Napier said, with sudden astounding calm, “that
this is perfectly idiotic. What? You see, I hadn’t the faintest
idea....”

But when, deceived by the calm of his voice, I looked at him, I found it
better to look away again at the frowsty old lay-sister sewing away at
her stocking. It was mean to look at him, he was too naked. I realised
how masked we always are, how this is a world of masked men, how we are
masked all day long, even on the most trivial occasions. Then I felt his
hands suddenly tight around my arm. And tighter. Now what?

“I’m awfully sorry,” I said idiotically.

“Look here--I say, for God’s sake! You see, I don’t understand. What?
She wrote to me weeks ago that she was going to be just slightly ill,
and now....”

The fingers dropped from my arm. “Hell!” he muttered. “Oh, hell! What?”
He hadn’t the faintest idea of what he was saying. I wished to God he
had, I didn’t want to listen to him, I hated listening to him, it was
like spying on the man. Spying on Tristram wandering in the forest
raving with love for Yseult. But what could I do? How leave him like
this? How let him return to Venice like this? Good Lord, and Venice
waiting in the taxi! If she saw him like this.... Good Lord, was the man
mad to have brought Venice with him! Here, to see Iris! The misty
impulses of a man of honour ... do nothing behind his wife’s back.
After, you know, having done everything. But ... Good Lord, if Venice
grew tired of waiting in the taxi and came and found Napier like this,
like a demented knight in a story! Venice of the lion’s cub head, the
mischievous, loyal eyes, dear Venice! adoring and adorable Venice!
Napier’s wife....

And, at that moment, I saw Venice again at the Loyalty, that night ten
months ago, happily waiting for Napier, whose wife she would be in three
days. “Darling, darling, _darling_!” That night of Gerald’s death! And
then for the first time I remembered the cry of “Iris!” in the night,
and the two red rear-lights swerving into South Audley Street, and I
understood how it was that Iris in her letter had called me her
“destroyer” ... her “destroyer” with love, for no lover could have
passed her way that night had I told her about Gerald. And Napier had
passed her way, Napier whom she had seen that night for the first time
in many years, Napier her ancient friend. “There were two roads leading
from a certain tree....” And the two roads had come together in the
darkness of that night, in the darkness of cruelly blind chance, and now
they had come together again in the darkness of this night, while Venice
waited outside....

I couldn’t, you can see, not do anything just then. I couldn’t let this
love-lost man be found by Venice in her husband’s shoes. Napier and
Venice, the happy lovers.... I was on Venice’s side. For Venice! Always,
I was for Venice. One likes so few people, but one likes those few very,
very much. This love-lost man must be woken up, must _behave_. Of course
he must behave! Venice, for Venice! How dared he have done this to
Venice? Marrying her on the third day from that night....

I asked him where he was staying, and when he said “the Meurice,” I told
him that if he would go now I could ring him up when I had seen the
doctor. “It’s no good waiting here,” I said. “I know the doctor.”

He stared at me with the immense, the devastating, dignity of the
utterly careless. I bitterly wanted to wake him up, to make him see the
thing he had done, the beastly thing. For Venice! “It’s no good,” I said
cruelly, “keeping Venice waiting for ever....”

He scowled at me, or at something just behind my shoulder. “I’m going to
see Iris,” he said.

It was quite definite, he was going to see Iris. It would probably, I
supposed, do Iris all the good in the world to see Napier on this
critical night. Napier and Iris. It might make her care whether she
lived or died ... but why shouldn’t she die? Venice would condemn her to
die. Iris was the foe. Why shouldn’t she die? You can’t do things like
that, and not die. Stealing like a little thief into the garden of
Venice, and stealing away like a little thief ... to bear Napier’s
child, unknown to Napier....

“Hell!” he muttered. I stared at him, at those burning, broken eyes.

“Hell!” he said. “Oh, God, what hell! What? If you only knew....”

“I don’t want to know,” I snapped. Well, did one want to know? But he
didn’t hear, didn’t care, didn’t see. Being with him, you can see, was
exactly like eavesdropping. Why, if Venice came in and saw this
love-lost man ... her Napier, her darling, like this, with burning
broken eyes. But there are some things that can’t happen! You couldn’t
take Napier from Venice. And how quickly, how poignantly, Venice, if she
saw him like this, would know the difference between his easy, smiling
love for her and this ... damnable madness.

But in the dark taxi she wouldn’t see his face, and I was just about to
try again to get him away when he said fiercely: “It’s not as though I
don’t know anything about it. Or do you think Iris is a liar? What?”

“Napier, you really must pull yourself together--”

“No, but any one would think I was a most fearful cad. What?”

And he scowled, in that Napier way of his that made one want to forgive
him everything. “I mean, not coming before, seeing she’s so ill ...
waiting all this time, and coming just now. Why, she wrote to me four
weeks ago, saying she was going to be just slightly ill and have a rest
for a week or two, so of course--Oh, look here, here’s the letter,
you’ll see for yourself--”

“But I don’t want to see for myself. Steady, man! I quite understand. Of
course you couldn’t know....”

“No, but look here, you’ll see....”

Feverishly he began fumbling in his inside-pockets, pulling out papers,
a pocket-book, passports....

Venice could be very still. I imagined her in the doorway, looking at
Napier in this state. She would be very still, and in her stillness she
would be destroyed. Venice was jealous, so jealous and possessive. “Got
to be with Napier,” she had pleaded to me once. “You don’t know what
he’s thinking about half the time, and he doesn’t know what he’s doing
the other half.”

Some of the papers dropped to the floor, and I picked them up and thrust
them into his gaping pocket. The old nun smiled at me over her
spectacles, and then looked at Napier and tapped her forehead. But you
could see she liked the looks of Napier. “_Quelle belle silhouette!_”
she grinned. I don’t believe that Napier to this day knows there was any
one but our two selves in that lodge.

He waved a white thing covered with scrawled pencil-marks, and beside it
I somehow saw that letter from a draughty house on a hill of strangled
olives. But between the two came the vision of Venice destroyed.

“I don’t want to read it, Napier. I quite understand. What on earth
does it matter whether you knew or not, so long as you know now?”

“Thinks a lot of you,” he said darkly. “Told me, last time I saw
her....”

He passed a hand over his mouth. I said: “But....”

“Beastly,” he said, looking at me with enormous, dark surprise. “That’s
what I feel. Beastly. As though my skin was a dirty shirt. Ever get
that? I mean, here she’s dying, and I ... God, how one gets to know
oneself! What? But I’d like you to see. I mean, since it’s you. She
thinks a lot of you, I know she does. Thinks you’re nice. Funny how she
says that, ‘nice.’ What? But what’s she want to lie for? Iris never
lies. Never. That’s what beats me. I mean, why, to me? What? Go on,
you’ll see....”

Crumpled the letter was, but he had, in a sort of way, smoothed it out.
I stared at it. I had to, for he was watching me with those ruined,
pleading eyes. The greyhound unleashed....

“She’s dying.” I heard his voice from miles away. “You can’t tell me!
She’s dying....”

“She won’t die,” I said firmly, glad to look up from the letter. And,
you know, I was quite certain at that moment that she wouldn’t die. The
beloved of the favourite of the gods wouldn’t die. The favourites of the
gods are not let off so easily. Oh, she wouldn’t die! It would be too
easy to die. “The Marches are never let off anything....”

I stared at the crumpled-looking thing in my hand. I didn’t read it. The
poor devil was only showing me the thing because, at that lost moment,
he was starving for understanding, for any one’s understanding, after
these ten months of silence, of Venice-Napier-Iris silence....

I couldn’t, merely from the wretched fact of staring at the thing
blankly, avoid the first few lines of that schoolgirl scrawl. “Napier, I
have to go to a nursing-home for a few weeks’ rest. Napier, dear Napier!
I’ve tried not to write, you know I have, just as we promised, but as we
are never to meet again I’d like you to pray----”

That is all I read, and there I stood, staring at that crumpled letter
like an idiot. “As we are never to meet again....”

Figures moved, I could see them, hear them, their cries, laughter,
silences. Their silences. Napier, Venice, Iris. They had come together,
blindly, desperately. By chance--but it is written in vinegar that there
is no such thing as chance. And I, why, I had been appointed, a silly
finger of fate, to make “chance” more sure! They had come together,
those three, propelled to each other from darkness for darkness’s sake.
The weak to the weak, the strong in chains. Always that is the way of
things, and for no reason at all except life’s most damnable unfairness,
which is for ever saying: the weak shall be made weaker, the strong
shall be destroyed. Venice was strong, strong as gold, in loyalty and
love. Incorruptible, golden Venice! Salute to Venice! So, said the
Prince of Darkness, she must be destroyed, and to destroy her in the
most efficient and painful way Napier must see Iris, unseen since
girlhood, a grown-up Napier must see a grown-up Iris, a youth curiously
sensible to the pitiful must suddenly see an Iris wrapped in tragedy and
scandal, a helpless, hopeless, unhappy woman--the favourite of the gods
and the poor shameless, shameful lady! And it was arranged, the
destruction of Venice, to begin with a sudden, surprised cry of “Iris!”
in the night, and then, behold! two cars would sweep through the silent
streets into the heart of the dark forest of London, even to Napier’s
small toy house in Brompton Square. Oh, how clearly one could see them,
hear them, those friends of long ago. Clear to see they were, fumbling
with their lives in the darkness of all life, most emphatically not
talking of love, most emphatically being old friends. Clear to see,
those two, Napier and Iris, the ancient friends. Maybe, to make chance
more sure and flesh more weak, which is a jesting habit of the fallen
archangel’s, they had been in love long ago and had been unhappy and had
parted. The queer death of Boy Fenwick would have come between a boy and
girl love, and across the wide gulf that separates a young man of
consequence from a lady of pleasure they would not have seen each other
for a long time. “There were two roads leading from a certain tree.” And
one might hear Napier that night, not this love-lost thing, but the
favourite of the gods, happy on the wings of an ancient friendship,
pulling at Iris’s arm to persuade her out of her car: “Iris, come in for
a moment. Oh, come along, Iris! I know how fond you are of a nice glass
of cold water, and I have some of the most superior cold water in
London. What? And we’ll never have another chance to talk again....” And
Iris, Iris of the lament for a child! Iris had lit a flame and was like
to be burnt to death in the cold fires of that flame. Iris had lit a
flame, and the flames that Iris lit seemed quenchable only by death. Boy
and Iris. Hector and Iris. Napier and Iris. But Napier could not die,
favoured of the gods. Iris could not die, “for the Marches are never let
off anything,” and so it would be the younger brother of
Hector-not-so-proud who must die, who must have died, thoughtfully
trying to tempt his mother into the carelessness of death.


